DOCTORWHO
AND THE DOOMSDAYWEAPON

By MALCOLM HULKE

Based on the BBC television serial Doctor Who and the Colony in Space
by Malcolm Hulke by arrangement with the British Broadcasting Corporation



1 A Missing Secret

The young Time Lord sat at the side of the old Keeper of the Time Lords'
Files at the control console. The old Keeper of the Files played his spindly fingers
across the console's warmth-buttons, by touching the right combination of
buttons he could project onto the screen before them any of the Time Lords' most
secret files and records.

'These are the working-papers for the very first TARDIS,' the old Keeper
said. He touched some warmth-buttons and the picture of a small square box
showed on the screen. 'I often like to look at that, and to remember back into
time.'

'Time has no meaning for us,' said the young Time Lord. 'It is neither
forwards nor backwards.'

'For us as a species, no,' said the old Keeper. 'But for us as individuals there
is a beginning, and, I regret, an end.' He spoke with feeling. He was now well
over 2,000 years old. Soon this young Time Lord, a mere 573 years of age, would
become the new Keeper of the Files.

The young Time Lord quickly changed the subject. 'The first TARDIS was
very small,' he said.

'On the outside, yes,' said the old Keeper. 'Inside it could carry up to three
persons, four with a squeeze. Later we built much bigger ones. There have been
two stolen, you know.'

The young Time Lord didn't know. 'By our enemies?' he asked.
'No. By Time Lords. They both became bored with this place. It was too

peaceful for them, not enough happening.' The old Keeper smiled to himself,
as though remembering with some glee all the fuss when two TARDISes were
stolen. 'One of them nowadays calls himself “the Doctor”. The other says he
is “the Master”. The TARDIS stolen by the Doctor has a serious defect. Two
defects, to be correct.'

'Then how was he able to get away with it?'
'Oh, it flew all right,' said the old Keeper. 'It could fly through Time and

Space, through Matter and anti-Matter. But he can't direct it.'
'So he's lost in Time and Space?' asked the young Time Lord.
'Hardly.' The old Keeper was silent for a moment, and seemed almost about

to drop off to sleep. The young Time Lord had become used to this and waited
patiently. Suddenly the old Keeper's failing energies returned. 'Still, even if he
cannot control it, others sometimes can.'

'I don't understand,' said the young Time Lord, 'what others? Who?'
'Who? No, Who can't control it... not always.' The old Keeper dropped his

voice, and there was a faint smile on his 2,000-years-old lips. 'But others
sometimes can.'

Obviously the question was not going to be answered. The young Time
Lord hoped that eventually, perhaps in another thousand years, he would learn
everything about the files and their secrets. For the time being though he had to
be content with what the old Keeper cared to tell him.



'The other defect,' said the old Keeper, 'was that that particular TARDIS
had lost its chameleon-like quality. It was in for repairs, you see - that's how the
Doctor got his hands on it.'

'I don't understand about the chameleon quality,' said the young Time Lord,
wishing he had taken over the job of the Files a few hundred years ago when the
present Keeper was more lucid and awake and better able to explain things.

'It's a termwe borrowed from a small, low-grade species of life on the planet
Earth,' said the old Keeper, as though addressing a classroom. 'If a chameleon
stands on the branch of a tree, it turns brown like the bark; but if it stands on a
leaf, it turns green.'

'You mean TARDISes can change colour?'
'When they are working properly,' said the old Keeper, 'they change colour,

shape, everything. From the beginning it was decided that a TARDIS must
always look like something at home in its immediate background. You've never
travelled, have you?'

'No, not yet.' The young Time Lord was a little ashamed to admit it.
'Pity. It broadens the mind.' The old Keeper seemed to drop off to sleep

again for a moment, then he suddenly woke up with a start. 'I had to travel once.
There were tens of thousands of humans from the planet Earth, stranded on
another planet where they thought they were refighting all the wars of Earth's
terrible history. The Doctor' - he interrupted himself - 'l told you about him, didn't
I?'

'Yes,' said the young Time Lord, now used to the old Keeper forgetting what
he had already said. 'You mentioned the Doctor and the Master.'

'No, it wasn't the Master,' said the old Keeper in his confused way. 'The
Master never does anything good for anyone. He's thoroughly evil. Now what
was I saying?'

The Young Time Lord reminded him. 'Humans on a planet refighting the
wars of Earth's history.'

'Oh, yes. Well, the Doctor had done the best he could to stop it all. But in
the end we had to step in and get all those poor soldiers back to Earth, and to all
the right times in Earth's history.'

'And is that when you travelled?'
'That's right,' said the old Keeper, his eyes bright now with the memory of

his one and only trip away from the planet of the Time Lords. 'I and many others.
When it landed, my TARDIS turned into a machine-gun post.'

'What's that?'
The old Keeper glanced at the young Time Lord. 'Oh, dear, you have a lot to

learn.' He seemed to forget the question, and went on, 'Anyway, TARDISes are
supposed to change colour and shape, but the one stolen by the Doctor stays all
the time looking like a London police box.' Before the young Time Lord could
speak, the old Keeper added quickly 'And don't ask me what that is because I
have no idea, not what they are for. Where were we?'

The young Time Lord indicated the small box on the screen. 'The working-
papers for the original TARDIS.'

'Then that's enough of that,' said the old Keeper, taking his finger from the
'hold' button. Instantly, the picture on the screen vanished. 'It's time we had a
break now, don't you think? I don't want to overwork you.'



'We've only just started this session of tuition,' said the young Time Lord.
'But if you're tired...'

The old Keeper sat up straight. 'Not at all!' He thrust a slender white hand
into a pocket of his robe, fumbled about and brought out a scrap of paper. On
it were mathematical symbols. 'I made some notes here of things you ought to
know about. Let me see...' The young Time Lord watched as the old Keeper
screwed up his watery eyes to read the symbols. 'Ah, yes,' said the old Keeper,
'the Doomsday Weapon. You must know about the Doomsday Weapon.' He put
the scrap of paper back into his pocket, then spread both hands across the
warmth-buttons.

The young Time Lord asked, 'I take it we have this weapon in safe keeping?'
'No,' said the old Keeper. 'It's not necessary. It is hidden on a distant and

remote planet, a hiding-place known only to us.' He poised his fingers over a
new combination of warmth-buttons.

'Why is it called Doomsday?'
'Because,' said the old Keeper, 'that is its name. Anybody controlling that

terrible weapon could bring instant doom to large sections of the Universe. It
radiates anti-Matter at a million times the speed of light.' He nodded his head
at a button in the top left-hand corner of theconsole. 'Could you put your finger
over that button, please. It's a safety measure, so that no one person with only
two hands can activate the combination to produce the file on the Doomsday
Weapon.'

The young Time Lord poised an index finger over the button.
'Now lower your finger,' said the old Keeper, 'as I lower mine.'
The old Keeper lowered his fingers onto a pattern of buttons, and the young

Time Lord brought his index finger down gently onto the one remote button.
Then they looked up at the screen. Printing appeared and it read: 'TOP SECRET.
EXACT WHEREABOUTS OF THE DOOMSDAY WEAPON, AND
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE.'

'That's just the title-page of the file,' said the old Keeper. 'Move your finger
to the next button on the right'

The young Time Lord moved his index finger along to the adjacent button.
Instantly, the printing disappeared and the screen went blank.

'All right,' said the old Keeper. 'Now touch the button.'
The young Time Lord touched the button. One line of bold handwriting

appeared on the screen from the first inside page of the secret file. It said: ' Thank
you for letting me know where to find the Doomsday Weapon. - The Master. '

The three most superior Time Lords, known simply as the First, Second,
and Third Time Lords, sat round a small oval table in their meeting-room. On the
table before them was the report from the Keeper pf the Files, which included
the Master's message.

'At least the Master has a sense of humour,' said the Third Time Lord.
'He is also exceedingly dangerous and vicious,' said the Second Time Lord.

'If he finds the Doomsday Weapon he can control the entire Universe through
terror.'

The First Time Lord turned to a microphone set by his chair. 'Status report
on the Master,' he said. Within a moment a voice answered from a loudspeaker
in the ceiling above them.



'Last monitored on planet Earth,' said the voice. 'Late twentieth century
Earth Time.'

'Earth?' said the Second Time Lord. 'Isn't that where we exiled the Doctor?'
'Yes,' said the First Time Lord, 'because he interfered too much in the

destinies of other species.' He turned to the microphone again. 'Status report on
the Doctor.'

The voice from the ceiling answered: 'Exiled to planet Earth by the High
Tribunal, late twentieth century Earth Time.'

'I think,' said the First Time Lord, 'we might use the Doctor to deal with
this problem.'

'Never,' said the Third Time Lord. 'He will not help us. He resents his exile
too much.'

'That's true,' said the Second Time Lord. 'We also immobilised his TARDIS,
taking away his freedom to move in Space and Time.'

'Then,' said the First Time Lord, 'we have no alternative but to restore his
freedom.'

'Never!' exclaimed the Second Time Lord. 'If we seek his help he will hold
it over us for ever more, and if we restore his freedom we shall have no control
over him!'

The First Time Lord listened patiently to the outburst. Then he spoke
quietly. 'We shall only let him think he is free again. We shall let his TARDIS
fly, but only where we want it to fly.'

'What about afterwards?' asked the Third Time Lord.
'If the Doctor is unsuccessful; said the First Time Lord, 'and is killed by

the Master, or by those who protect the Doomsday Weapon, there will be no
afterwards. Only time will tell.' He smiled at his own joke, and the other two
Time Lords respectfully smiled with him.



2 Into Time and Space

Jo Grant squeezed her white mini between the Brigadier's big black staff-
car and a military half-track vehicle in the UNIT car-park, got out and walked
purposefully towards the main administration block. Overnight she had come
to a big decision, either the Doctor must give her some work to do, or she was
going to hand in her resignation.

It was really her uncle's fault. While still at school she decided what she
most wanted to do, to become a spy. One half-term she took herself to London
and sought out her uncle who worked as a Senior Civil Servant for the
Government. 'I want to be a spy,' she said. He laughed, and sent out one of his
many secretaries to buy her an ice-cream. 'There really are spies,' she insisted
earnestly, 'and I want to be one.' She never knew whether her uncle took her
completely seriously, or just wanted to please her, but the day she left school a
letter arrived inviting her an interview at the Security Training Establishment,
somewhere in Surrey. She was accepted, and spent a year learning how to code
and decode, how to speak two foreign languages, and how to read economic
reports on wheat and oil production. At the end of the year she was given top
marks, and told that her training was over. She was then offered a job as a filing
clerk in the British Embassy in Bangkok .

Furious, Jo went to see her uncle again. 'I don't call that being a spy,' she
complained. Her uncle tried to explain, most 'spying' in the world was carried
on by clerks working in embassies; in fact most embassies, British and foreign,
existed in order to send home reports on the economy of the country in which
they were situated. It was dull, routine work. 'You should have explained that
a year ago,' she said. 'I want an exciting job, and I don't mind if it's dangerous.'
Her uncle thought for a moment, then said, 'How would you like to work for the
United Nations Intelligence Taskforce?' She asked, 'What does it do?' 'Ah,' said
the uncle, 'that's rather secret! But I'll have a word with Brigadier Lethbridge-
Stewart. He's the man for you to see.'

A week later she was seated before the handsome Brigadier in his office
at UNIT Headquarters. From the start of the interview, she realised he didn't
really want her on his staff. He was very polite, but it was clear he was only
taking her on because her uncle had asked him. 'We have a chap here,' he said,
'called “the Doctor”. He needs an assistant. That could be you.' She said, 'I don't
know anything about medicine.' The Brigadier looked puzzled, then laughingly
exclaimed, 'Oh, not that kind of Doctor. He's a scientist. You can start onMonday
if you like.' With that the interview ended.

On the following Monday Jo reported for work and met the Doctor. He
didn't seem at all impressed with her, and after a few minutes' talk about the
weather he said he had important business elsewhere and hurried away. She
didn't see him again for two days, during which period she wandered around the
Headquarters to get to know it and the people who worked there.

On the Wednesday she found the Doctor again in what seemed to be a
laboratory; for some reason an old-fashioned London police box stood in one
corner. The Doctor was tinkering with some electrical gadget at a work bench.



'What are you doing?' said Jo. The Doctor looked up, and for the first time she
saw that he had a very nice smile. 'I'd better explain,' he said; 'that's a Time
and Space machine' - he indicated the old police box - 'but it doesn't work at
the moment. I'm trying to repair it.' Jo suddenly realised she had been given a
job with a madman. 'Time and Space machine?' she laughed, not believing. The
Doctor's smile faded quickly , 'I'll let you know if I need your assistance at any
time. Good morning.' With that he turned back to the work bench. Jo still had
nothing to do.

That was a week ago now. During the week she had mooned around the
Headquarters, bored out of her mind. Now, today, she intended to have a
showdown. Even being a filing clerk in the Embassy in Bangkok could be more
interesting than reading magazines at UNIT Headquarters to kill time. As she
entered the main building she passed Sergeant Benton, who gave her a friendly
'Good morning', but she was too angry to reply. She went straight down to the
Doctor's laboratory. He was there, as always, tinkering with bits of wire on the
work bench.

'I must speak to you,' she said. 'I'm supposed to work for you, but you don't
give we anything to do!'

'Just a moment, my dear.' The Doctor seemed to apply himself to some task
requiring great concentration. Jo looked and saw he was soldering two bits of
wire together - nothing more complicated.

'Look,' she said, 'what is that thing you're working on?'
'It's a new dematerialisation circuit,' he said. He had by now successfully

joined together the two bits of wire. 'There! That bit's done.' He straightened up
and looked pleased with himself.

'Dematerialisation?' queried Jo. 'Of what?'
'The TARDIS,' said the Doctor, as if Jo ought to understand.
Jo was completely puzzled. 'What sort of Doctor are you?' she asked.
'What sort would you like me to be?' the Doctor
Before Jo couldmake a retort, the Brigadier had entered 'Oh, 'morning,Miss

Grant,' he said, acknowledging her existence for the first time in a week; then
he turned to the Doctor. 'I've just got the latest field reports about the Master.
There's no trace of him.'

'As I expected,' said the Doctor. 'His TARDIS is working now, remember.
He could be anywhere in Space and Time.'

'That's as may be,' said the Brigadier. 'But I'm going to keep on looking.'
'You're wasting your time,' said the Doctor.
Jo looked from one of the men to the other as they talked, with as much

understanding as a cat watching a ball bounced between two table-tennis players.
She had never heard of 'the Master', nor did she know what 'TARDIS' meant.
Then she realised that the work bench 'phone was ringing, and since the other
two were deep in this mysterious conversation she picked it up to answer - the
first act of work since she had joined UNIT.

'Hello?'
A man's voice asked for the Brigadier. Jo gave the 'phone to Lethbridge-

Stewart, and he had a quickfire conversation with the caller. Then he cradled the
'phone, and turned back to the Doctor. He seemed very pleased.



'One of our agents thinks he's traced the Master,' said the Brigadier. 'I hope
to be back here within the hour with good news. Excuse me.'

The Brigadier hurried out. The Doctor watched after him, shaking his head
sadly.

'Can't you tell me anything that's going on?' asked Jo. 'Who is the Master,
and what's a TARDIS?'

'Didn't the Brigadier explain it all to you?' said the Doctor.
'No,' said Jo. 'No one's explained anything.'
'Oh dear,' the Doctor said. 'Well, the Master is a fellow we've had quite a bit

of trouble with. As for TARDIS, that means Time And Relative Dimensions in
Space.' The Doctor ended there with a smile, as though he had explained
everything.

'Time and Relative Dimensions...' said Jo. 'You mean that thing?' She
pointed to the old police box.

'That thing ,' said the Doctor, obviously a little hurt, 'is probably the most
advanced technological device you will ever encounter in your entire life.'

Jo went over and inspected the police box. 'It looks just like an old police
box to me.'

'I see,' said the Doctor, clearly not very pleased with Jo's attitude. 'Since I'm
about to go inside I'll let you see for yourself.' The Doctor picked up the electrical
gadget he had been working on, crossed to the police box and produced a key.
He unlocked the little narrow. door, and threw it open. 'After you.'

Jo looked inside, expecting to see a poky little space perhaps with a police
telephone and a first-aid box. Inside she found herself looking into a huge,
futuristic-looking control room.

She turned back to the Doctor , 'It's a trick. An optical illusion.'
'Why not step inside and see?' said the Doctor.
Cautiously, Jo entered the TARDIS. It was at least twenty times bigger

inside than outside. She stood just inside, unable to speak. The Doctor, however,
followed her in and immediately went to a central console in the middle of the
vast, highly polished floor. Without a word he set about inserting his bit of
electrical gadgetry into a cavity in the console.

At last Jo got her voice back. 'How can it be bigger inside than out?'
'The TARDIS is dimensionally transcendental,' said the Doctor, busy with

his work. Whatever he was doing, he seemed satisfied with his own work. He
straightened up. 'As of this moment,' he said, 'I think my exile on Earth may be
over.'

'Your exile on Earth?' Jo was seriously worried about this strange man's
sanity. 'If you don't mind,' she said, 'I think I'll be getting along.' She turned on her
heel to leave, only to find that the huge metallic doors were just closing in front
of her. She swung back to the Doctor. 'Kindly open these doors immediately,
Doctor! The joke's over.'

Now the Doctor looked at the doors. A smile spread across his face. 'I don't
think I'll be able to,' he said. 'We're taking off!'

Jo crossed to the big doors, now firmly closed. 'Open these doors, Doctor!'
The Doctor suddenly seemed to realise that Jo was really terrified and that

he should do something. He went to the central console, pulled a small lever,



then looked to the doors. 'I'm very sorry,' he said, 'but things seem to be out of
my control. You'd better hold on to something tight'

Even before he had completed the sentence, the floor of the control room
started to vibrate violently, then to heave from side to side like a ship at sea. At
the same time, Jo's ears were pierced by a terrifying sound, something like, yet
not quite like, the trumpeting of a thousand mad elephants. Jo reeled across the
floor, grabbed at ametal support pillar and clung on for dear life. Her arms locked
round the support pillar, she felt violently sick, her mind filled with noise and the
heaving of the floor beneath her. Then black clouds filled her mind, and she was
just aware of slowly sinking to the floor, her arms still locked round the pillar.



3 The Planet

'I'm sorry, but I don't remember your name.'
Jo heard the Doctor's voice coming to her as though from a far distance.

Slowly she opened her eyes. She was on the floor of the TARDIS, her arms still
locked firmly and the base of the pillar. The Doctor was kneeling over her.

'Jo Grant,' she said, automatically. 'Call me Jo.'
'Let me help you up, Jo,' said the Doctor. He put his hands under her arms to

lift her. For a moment Jo let him, than, with returning strength, she got herself up.
'Open those doors, please.' Jo tried to sound very cold, like one of the

teachers she had known and hated at school. 'The joke's over, Doctor.'
'First,' the Doctor said, crossing back to the central console, 'we must check

if its safe.'
'It's perfectly safe to open those doors,' said Jo, keeping well away from

him. 'I intend to go straight to the Brigadier and offer my resignation.' Within a
week, she had decided, she would be on a plane to Bangkok , or wherever jobs
were going for Embassy filing clerks.

But theDoctor was taking no notice of her. Instead, hewas gazing inwonder
at a monitor screen set in the wall of the control room. 'Look,' he said. 'Just look
at that.'

Jo looked. The monitor screen showed a barren landscape, a treeless stretch
of rock and occasional shrubs. 'It looks like somewhere in North Wales ,' she
said, trying to humour him. 'Now please open the doors'

'But don't you realise,' he said, 'thats what's outside. I must cheek the
temperature and the atmosphere before we open those doors.' The Doctor busied
himself reading dials set in the control console. 'Good,' he said at last. 'Very
similar to Earth.'

'No little green men with two heads?' queried Jo, sarcastically, still keeping
her distance from the Doctor.

The Doctor looked again at the monitor screen. 'Not so far as I can see.
Actually, two-headed species in the Cosmos are very rare. There are the Deagles,
a sort of two-headed birdlike creature, on one of the planets in the Asphasian
Belt, but I've only read about those. I haven't been there yet...'

Jo cut in, 'Just open the doors, please!' She stood with her back pressed
against the doors, to keep as far as possible from this raving lunatic called the
Doctor.

'Certainly,' he said 'I hope we're going to find it interesting.'
The Doctor operated the small lever. Jo could just hear the doors opening

behind her. She remained facing the Doctor, not daring to take her eyes off him
in case he went suddenly mad and tried to attack her. Only when she was sure
that the doors were fully open, allowing her to make a quick run for it up to the
Brigadier's office, did she turn. And then she saw the barren landscape that lay
outside. Her heart pounded. She couldn't utter a sound.

'Well?' said the Doctor, coming up behind her. 'Shall we investigate?'



Without waiting for an answer, the Doctor strode outside. A keen wind
ruffled his hair. lie stood them, breathing deeply, clearly very happy. Then he
looked back at Jo. 'Shall we take a walk?'

Jo stepped outside. As she did to, she turned back to look at the TARDIS. It
was the same police box she had seen in the Doctor's laboratory. 'Where are we?'

'No idea,' said the Doctor. 'Anywhere, and any time, in the Cosmos. I
suggest that we take a quick look round; then I'll try to get you back to Earth.'

'We're not on Earth?'
'I rather doubt it.' The Doctor stood surveying the landscape of rock and

occasional shrub. Then he spotted something on the horizon. 'No,' he said,
'definitely not Earth. Look over there.'

Jo looked to the horizon, and saw two bright white discs in the sky. 'What
are they?'

'Moons,' he said. 'Planet Earth has only one. This planet has those two,
possibly more. So we're certainly not on Earth.' He stopped short, his keen eyes
looking at something on the ground a few yards away. 'It's inhabited!' He hurried
across to the point he had noticed. 'On the ground here,' he called back to Jo,
'tracks made by some kind of machine.' He inspected the tracks, then stood up
straight and looked all around. 'Let's go up there,' he called. 'We'll get a better
view. Come on!'

The Doctor strode off towards a small hill. Jo had had enough of all this.
She turned to go back inside the TARDIS. The door was closed. She tried it, but
it was locked. 'Doctor,' she called, 'come and open this door at once!' But the
Doctor was already out of earshot, half way up the slaggy little hill. In sudden
anger Jo raced after him, stumbling over the rocks. 'Doctor,' she called as she
ran, 'I think this is all some big trick. You hypnotised me, and now you're making
me think I'm on another planet!' At last she was up beside him. 'Do you hear me!
I want to go home!'

But the Doctor was gazing in wonder into the distance. 'Look over there,
Jo.' He pointed to a valley now visible from the hilltop. In the valley was a dome-
shaped object as big as a very large house, and next to it what might be a
spaceship. The dome and the spaceship were about two miles away from where
they stood. 'We could easily walk over there,' the Doctor said with almost
childlike enthusiasm. 'It wouldn't take more than an hour.'

Jo said, 'I want to go back to your TARDIS.'
'But Jo, there may be some different life form over there, something neither

of us has ever seen before in our lives, and will never see again.' There was
pleading in the Doctor's voice.

'Have you really done this sort of thing before?' asked Jo. Shewas beginning
to feel less scared of the Doctor, even a little sorry for him.

'What?' he said, as though his interest had suddenly darted off in another
direction. He had picked up a small piece of rock and was examining it with
great curiosity.

'This space travelling,' said Jo. 'Have you done this tx fore?'
'For years I roamed the Universe,' he said. 'Then the Time Lords cought me,

exiled me to Earth, and immobilised my TARDIS. You see, I don't really want
to work for UNIT. I want to be free.' He paused, looking up from the piece of



rock in his hand. 'We could get to that valley in an hour or so, have a look round,
and then go back to TARDIS and get back to Earth. What do you say?'

Jo gave in. 'All right. But I still don't believe any of this is really happening.
I expect to wake up any moment and find - '

' Stand where you are! '
The gruff male voice shouted from behind them. Both the Doctor and Jo

remained absolutely still.
'One move,' said the voice, 'and I'll shoot!'
Jo heard the man's booted feet on the rocks as he circled round them. She

didn't even dare to move her head to look at him. The man circled them at a
distance to bring himself facing them. He was a rough-looking man wearing
heavy boots, blue denims, and an old battered hat. He held a futuristic-looking
shotgun, which he kept trained on the Doctor and Jo.

'Inspecting rock samples, eh?' said the man.
'What?' The Doctor looked at the piece of rock in his hand. 'Oh, yes. Could

you point that gun the other way?'
'Bit of prospecting, eh?' said the man, more as a statement than a question.
'Is there anything to prospect for?' asked the Doctor.
The man gestured with his gun. 'Start moving.'
'That's most kind of you,' the Doctor said. 'You see we have our means of

transport not far from here. Come along, Jo.' He grabbed Jo's hand, and turned
in the direction of the TARDIS.

'Not that way!' said the man. 'Straight ahead. I'm taking you in as prisoners.'
'We haven't done anything wrong,' Jo said 'We don't even want to be here.'
'Move,' said the man, 'or I shoot.'
'I think we must do what he wants,' the Doctor said. 'This way, Jo.'
Jo clung to the Doctor's hand as they moved forward. The man followed

behind, his gun on their backs all the time. Despite theDoctor's efforts, he refused
to be drawn into conversation. He only spoke to tell them to bear a bit more
to the left or the right. First they went downhill, away from the TARDIS, then
up another very small hill. When they reached the crest of this hill they saw
before them a small dome surrounded by crude fencing. This clearly was their
destination, and the Doctor strode towards it with Jo still clinging to his hand.
As Jo got closer she could see that the dome was made of moulded metal sheets,
and that the structure had a door and windows. It looked very futuristic, yet the
fence running round the 'garden' consisted of crudely hacked tree branches, as
one might have seen on Earth in the Middle Ages,

'Go in,' said the man.
The Doctor and Jo entered the dome. It was very simply furnished - just

an old bed, a rough kitchen table, some hardback chairs. A woman dressed in a
long skirt and blue denim shirt was cooking something, using a portable infra-
red oven. Her simple clothes were faded and had been patched many times.

'Good afternoon,' said the Doctor.
The woman spun round in astonishment.
The man followed them inside, still keeping his gun trained on them. 'I

found them spying in Sector 27,' he told the woman, who was obviously his wife.
'Cover them.'



Without a word the woman took a shotgun from the wall, and aimed it at
Jo and the Doctor. Now the man put down his gun. 'Hands above your heads,'
he said 'I want your weapons.'

'We have no weapons,' the Doctor said. 'And why do you have guns? Who
are you afraid of?'

But the man didn't answer. He crossed to the Doctor, and felt his pockets
for concealed arms. Satisfied that he had none. he turned his attention to Jo.

'You're not touching me ,' said Jo.
'Maybe not,' said the man. He fumed to his wife. 'Keep an eye on them. I'll

radio-telephone Ashe, and tell him that I'm bringing them in.' He went to a corner
of the one main room, sat himself before a radio-telephone, put on earphones
and quietly had a conversation with whomever he was calling.

'I asked,' said the Doctor, 'why you have guns?'
'The Primitives,' said the woman. 'We heard a band of them roaming about

in this area.'
'Are they the original inhabitants of this planet?' the Doctor asked.
She said, 'Didn't they tell you?'
'Didn't who tell me?' asked the Doctor.
'The combine that you're working for,' she said. 'We're not working for

anybody,' said the Doctor.
'Then who sent you?' she said.
'No one,' said the Doctor. 'We came here of our own accord. We're from

the planet Earth.'
'This is our planet,' said the woman. 'We don't need any more settlers.'
'Settlers?' said the Doctor. 'We're not settlers. We are explorers.'
The man returned from the radio-telephone and heard what the Doctor said,

'So you admit it! You're explorers, prospecting for one of the mining cornbines!'
He turned to his wife. 'Ashe says for me to take them to the main dome right
away.' He picked up his gun, trained it on the Doctor. 'Right! Move! And you,
too, Miss!'

Jo said, 'I do wish you'd let us explain.'
'You can do your explaining at the main dome,' the man replied. 'On your

way, now! And if either of you try to run for it, I'll kill you both.' He turned to
his wife , 'You come too, and bring your gun.'

Nothing was said during the second part of their journey, except for an
occasional 'Move to the right' or 'Move to the left' from the man behind them
with the gun. All the ground they covered was rocky and bare, although once Jo
saw a pretty little flower with alternate red and blue petals - something she could
never see on Earth. But she thought it best not to stop to inspect the flower; the
man with the gun might have fired instantly. After four or five little hills they
came into sight again of the big dome with its spaceship. Being closer now to
the spaceship she could see that it was rather battered in appearance, and some
lettering on its side had been partly burned off so that she could not make out
any of the words.

'In there?' the Doctor asked, not turning his head but indicating the main
entrance to the dome.

'In there,' said the voice behind them.



Jo and the Doctor went into the main dome, the man and woman following
them. The man said, 'Stop where you are.'

They halted, and Jo looked round the inside of the main dome. They were
in a large room that formed only part of the interior of the dome; corridors led off
to other parts. Different from the exterior of the dome, with its futuristic sheets
of gleaming moulded metal, the inside was more like a barn. There were plastic
crates stored in one corner, and bits of agricultural machinery stacked in another.
The floor was untidy with bits of mud and straw brought in on the boots of the
people who came in and out of the building which was, in effect, the meeting-
place of some community. And now, as they entered and stopped, a meeting was
in progress. A big, white-haired man, clearly the leader, was listening to a man
and woman who seemed very upset and worried. Standing about, listening, were
other men and women. They all wore clothes similar to those of the man standing
now behind Jo and the Doctor with his gun - simple farm workers' denims and
heavy boots, with all the women and girls in long skirts.

'Now you listen to me, Ashe,' said the worried-looking man, 'I saw those
creatures. Both me and my wife saw them, with our own eyes!'

The big man with white hair, called Ashe, tried to look calm. 'I surveyed
this planet myself before the colony was set up. There was no trace of hostile
animal life.'

Now the worried-looking woman spoke up. 'We heard this roaring in the
middle of the night. When we looked out, there it was.'

One of the younger men present asked a question. 'What did it look like?'
'It was enormous; the woman said. 'Some kind of giant lizard.'
Ashe asked calmly, 'Did it do any damage?'
'Well, no,' the worried-looking man replied, 'I took a few shots at it and

frightened it away.'
'You've been having nightmares!' the younger man retorted. 'Too much rich

food!'
All the people grinned, but it wasn't a happy grin. Jo realised that the young

man had made some joke that they all understood. Then she noticed how thin
they all were, and how threadbare were their clothes. These people were all poor,
just clinging on to an existence on this strange planet. The leader, Ashe, now
noticed the Doctor and Jo and the man and woman who had brought them here.

'All right, Leeson,' said Ashe, 'what's your problem? More monsters?'
'I found these two in Sector 27,' said Leeson, still keeping his gun trained

on Jo and the Doctor. 'They say they are explorers.'
'I'll deal with them in a moment,' said Ashe. He turned back to the worried-

looking man and woman who had been talking about monsters. 'Why don't you
two go and have something to cat, and a rest? You must be tired after walking
all the way here.'

'We've got to find the creature and kill it,' the man said. He turned to the
younger man, the one who had made the joke. 'Winton, you're in charge of the
guards. It's your job to go and kill this thing, not to make jokes. It's bad enough
trying to scratch a living on this planet without being pestered by giant lizards
in the middle of the night!'

An older woman stepped forward to the couple who had seen the monster.
'You could both do with something to eat. Come along with me.'



'All right,' said the man, 'for my wife's sake. But we've got to do something.
The crops won't grow, and the Primitives aren't all that friendly. If we've also
got to fight off monsters, my vote is that we all go back to where we came from!'

The man's wife tugged at his sleeve, and reluctantly he went with her down
one of the corridors. Ashe turned to the young man, Winton 'How many men
can you raise?'

'Here at the main dome,' Winton said, 'maybe half-a-dozen. The rest are on
outpost guard.'

'Half-a-dozen will have to do,' said Ashe. 'Put a guard on theMartins' dome,
just in case.'

'Right,' said Winton, and hurried away.
Ashe came over to the Doctor and Jo and the man called Leeson. 'Where

do you two come from?'
'Earth,' said the Doctor. 'You seen to have problems here.'
'I caught them examining rock samples,' said Leeson. 'They're

mineralogists. It was bound to happen. I said from the start they'd never leave
us in peace.

Jo was confused with what Leeson was saying. Who wouldn't leave them in
peace? - and what was bound to happen? But she thought it best to say nothing.
If life had been boring working for UNIT, it certainly wasn't dull now.

'Look,' the Doctor was saying, 'I'm not a professional mineralogist. But
suppose I were? Why all the hostility?'

'Because,' said Ashe, 'we don't want our planet gutted.'
'This is our world,' said Mrs. Leeson, speaking up for almost the first time,

her gun still trained on Jo and the Doctor. 'You've no right to be here!'
Now Jo couldn't contain herself any longer, 'Would someone please explain

what all this is about?'
'Yes, indeed,' said the Doctor. 'Surely you could explain to us what we're

being accused of doing?'
'This planet,' said Ashe, 'has been classified as suitable for colonisation.

That means farming, so far as we're concerned. But if the big mining companies
move in they'll tum it into a galactic slag heap in no time.'

'Don't you have any rights?' asked the Doctor.
'The big mining companies don't bother about people's rights,' said Leeson,

full of bitterness. 'They move in, rip the minerals out of a planet, and move on
somewhere else. It happened to the planet we got our seed from!'

'We're not sure of that,' said Ashe. 'We only know that their radio stopped
working.'

'Yes?' said Leeson. 'And what about their final message?'
'Do excuse me,' said the Doctor, 'but I don't understand what you're talking

about'
Ashe turned to the Doctor to explain. 'With no land farming on Earth, we

had to get seed from somewhere to start farming here. So on the way we stopped
at another colonised planet, and traded for seed. Once we got here we kept up
radio contact with those colonists for a while. They were very useful, giving
us advice. Then after some months they radio'd through and a voice said, “The
miners are here - ” and cut out. We never heard from them again.'



'Because they were probably all killed!' said Leeson hotly. He turned back
to the Doctor. 'If it happens here and we even have time to complain to Earth
Government, there'll be no decision from Earth till the miners have finished their
job. There won't be anything left to have rights about!'

'That's terrible,' said the Doctor. 'But I do assure you, I and my young
companion aren't working for anybody. Our spaceship developed a fault and we
had to land somewhere I'm very sorry that we've intruded.'

Ashe asked, 'Can you show use your identification?'
'Identification?' said the Doctor, taken off guard by this question. 'Oh, that's

back in my spaceship. If we could go back there - '
But Ashe cut in, 'I think it better if you two stay the night. It'll be dark

outside by now. We'll visit your ship in the morning.'
Jo had no wish to stay in this grim-looking barn for the night. 'We don't

want to put you to any trouble,' she said. 'We're quite willing to go now, and
find our own way.'

'As you heard,' said Ashe, 'two of or colonists believe they saw some hostile
creatures abroad last night. We must all be very careful.'

'We'll come to no harm,' said Jo. 'We can look after ourselves. Can't we,
Doctor?'

She looked up to the Doctor, hoping for agreement. Instead he was looking
straight ahead at Ashe. 'We shall be glacl to stay,' he said.

Jo tugged at his sleeve, 'But Doctor...'
He turned and gave her a look that clearly meant, ' Shut up and leave this

to me! '
Ashe turned to one of the younger women who was watching, a girl so like

him in her looks that clearly she was his daughter. 'Mary, why don't you take our
guests to the dining-hall? And arrange some sleeping quarters for them.'

The girl called Mary nodded, and smiled at Jo. 'We have a little food,' she
said. 'You're welcome to share it. Come.' She held out her hand for Jo to take it.

Jo looked from the Doctor to Ashe and to the Leeson, all of whomwere now
looking at her. 'All right,' she said at last, 'we'll stay just this one night. Coming
to supper, Doctor?'

'Shortly,' said the Doctor. 'There are things I wish to discuss here.'
Jo realised there was no point in arguing. She took hold of Mary's hand and

allowed herself to be taken down one of the corridors. It was dimly lit, but the
lights were electric. 'Where do you get your electrical power?' she asked the girl.

'The spaceship,' said Mary. 'The main dome is linked to its generators. This
is our dining-hall.'

Jo was led into a room with a single long table, on either side of which
were long benches. Like the few items of furniture in the Leesons' little dome,
the table and benches were poorly made with rough surfaces. Jo sat to the table,
while Mary went to ladle thick soup from a big black cauldron that stood on a
small electric ring. Mary brought the soup to Jo and gave her a roughly-made
wooden spoon.

'I'm afraid that's all we can offer,' Mary said. 'It's not very much, is it?'
Jo looked into the soup. It seemed to contain root vegetables. 'It looks very

nice,' she said. Then she tried some. It had almost no taste. 'It's marvellous,' she
lied.



'I'm glad you like it,' said Mary, and sat down beside Jo. She looked at Jo's
clothes. 'Is that what they're wearing on Earth now?'

'More or less,' said Jo.
'Things change so quickly,' Mary sighed. 'It was all quite different when we

left back in 'seventy-one.'
'You left Earth in nineteen seventy-one?' Jo asked. By 1971 only a handful

of astronauts had travelled beyond Earth, and then only for very short spells on
the Moon.

Mary laughed. 'You're a bit out with your time,' she said. 'Two thousand
nine hundred and seventy-one - that's when we left, just a year ago.'

'You mean the date is now 2972?'
'That's right,' said Mary, 'of course it is.'
Jo realised that she had not only travelled through Space; she had also

travelled through one thousand years of Time!



4 The Monster

Jane Leeson trudged through the darkness by the side of her husband. The
gun she carried weighed heavily in the crook of her arm, and she wondered if
she would ever get used to having to carry it every time she left their dome.

'Who do you think those people really are?' she asked her husband.
'I don't know,' he said. 'Ashe will sort it out.' He walked a little faster, so that

Jane had to hurry over the broken rocks to keep up. It was his way of showing
that he didn't want to talk.

She thought back on the life they had had together on Earth. From the
history books and the history films, she had learned of a time when there were
open spaces on Earth, when both people and animals could roam free in great
areas of grass and trees. But Earth hadn't been like that for hundreds of years.
Every square kilometre of land had been built over, with roads and monorails
over-running the great sprawling built-up areas. This area, which extended
everywhere, was twenty to thirty storeys deep, with linking corridors and
escalatorways so that people could go shopping and get to work - all under cover,
with fresh air sucked in by huge ventilators from above. As a special treat, on
nonwork days, you could pay to go up to the surface in an elevator and spend
a few hours sitting on concrete in the sunshine. Another treat was to go for a
Walk. This meant you paid to go into a special cubicle with a floor that rolled
from one end of the cubicle to another. To stay in one place you had to keep
walking. Meanwhile, all around you, there was a moving picture on the walls
of passing grass and trees, and sometimes wild animals, films that came from
the State Archives. To further the illusion they blew gusts of fresh air at you,
sometimes with funny smells that were supposed to resemble those of animals
and grass.

She met her husband during such a Walk. The roller had jerked suddenly,
owing to a power failure, and she had fallen over. Leeson helped her to her feet,
and so they met. By getting married they qualified for a room of their own.
Previously she had had to share a room with her parents and three sisters. The
marriage was conducted by a friendly computer that played music to them as
well as announcing that their State records had been stapled together in the great
Automatic State Personnel File, which meant they were then married. Then the
computer gave them the key to their room, a cubicle just big enough fora double-
bed, a shower, and a lavatory. They took one look at the room and decided they
had to escape.

In the old days. between five hundred and a thousand years ago, people
had escaped from the towns by going to the country. But there was no country
now. Instead, groups of people clubbed together and bought up old spaceships
and went to the planets. For the next six years Jane and her husband worked
hard and saved their money. Not once did they go up in the lifts for a sunshine
treat, or even for a Walk treat. At the end of this time they reckoned they had
enough money put by and started to read advertisements from people getting
together colonist groups. The advertisement they answered was from Ashe. He
had already travelled in Space on one of Earth's astro-merchant-ships, and he



knew of a planet not dissimilar from Earth which had been classified for
colonisation. It was uninhabited, Ashe said, except fora few Primitives who, if
handled properly would he no trouble. A meeting was held, and the Leesons
met the other people who had answered Ashe's advertisment. They pooled their
savings with the others, and then raided their local library for old books on what
was known as farming. Meanwhile Ashe. found a fairly good secondhand
spaceship, and organised the making of agricultural machinery based on pictures
in old books about land farming. Eventually the great day arrived, and all the
would-be colonists boarded the spaceship and they travelled to this awful planet.

Because, in Jane's troubled mind, this planet was awful. Certainly there
was room to move, and for the first few days the weary travellers from Earth
did nothing but walk around in huge circles, shout, and literally fling their arms
about. The main dome, brought in sections in the spaceship's vast hold, was put
up first, it provided temporary quarters for all of them, plus a permanent meeting-
place, and a home for John Ashe and his daughter. Then they all helped each
other to put up the small single-family domes, all some distance from the main
dome in the centre of the land which now belonged to the various couples and
families. After that they had to sow the seed they had brought, and then live on
iron-rations until the seed grew. But the seed did not grow. If it grew at all, it
quickly withered and died. Ashe, who had made himself expert in book-learnt
agriculture, spent day and night analysing soil samples and trying to work out
which fertilisers should be used where. But nothing made any difference.

Meanwhile, there came the news about the big mineralogical combines
from Earth gutting other planets, some of them with colonists already there.
Earth's mineral resources had been used up hundreds of years ago, forcing Man
to seek his needs on other planets. The big mining companies had built great
fleets of spaceships, manned by ruthless mercenaries who were quite capable
of plundering a planet already successfully colonised by farmers, ruining the
land, killing and maiming people who tried to stand up for their rights. If Earth
Goventmcnt took any action at all, it was almost always too late.

Now, on top of all their other fears and hardships, these other colonists, the
Martins, had been attacked by monsters. One thing Ashe had promised about
the planet was that it contained no hostile life forms. Jane had heard of some of
the terrifying creatures spaces travellers had found over the centuries - Monoids,
Drahvins, some small metallic creatures called Daleks, and even from the bowels
of Earth there had emerged once a race of reptile men.This planet was big, as
large as Earth itself, and it was foolish of them to believe Ashe when he had said
that there were no hostile life forms. How could one man know what lay over the
horizon, perhaps hundreds or thousands of kilometres away? - something that
had now become attracted to the humans' colony?

As they neared the single dome, Jane spoke her mind. 'I want to go back
to Earth.'

Her husband kept on walking. 'How?'
It was a sensible question. The spaceship belonged to all of them; it couldn't

be used by one couple who wanted to return to Earth. She said, 'We should have
a meeting, and see how many others feel like me. Those who want to stay can
do so. Those who want to go have a right to take the spaceship.'



Now they had reached their dome and were going inside. 'We'll talk about
it in the morning,' said Leeson.

'I want to talk about it now,' she said. 'We should never have come here.'
Leeson took her gun, hung it in its place on the wall. 'On Earth we had one

room. Here we own land.'
'Land that grows nothing,' she exclaimed bitterly. 'Ashe knowswe're beaten,

and so do you. You just won't admit it.'
But Leeson wasn't listening to her. He was standing in the middle of their

room, listening intently to something outside. He put his fingers to his lips to tell
Jane to be quiet. From somewhere she could hear a low growling sound.

'You get on the radio,' ordered Leeson. 'I'm going outside.'
'No, please,' his wife implored. 'Stay here!'
There was another growl, this time much louder and closer.
'I might be able to frighten it off,' said Lemon. 'Now do as you're told!'

Without another word Leeson walked back into the night outside. Almost
instantly there was a roar from the darkness beyond, the sort of sound Jane had
only ever heard before from the films during a Walk on Earth when you saw
non-existent animals called elephants and lions.

Jane went to the radio-telephone, put on the earphones, took up the
microphone and pressed the transmitting button. 'Hello, main dome. Can you
hear me? Can you hear me?'

Within a few moments Mary Ashe's voice came through the earphones.
'This is main dome. Please identify.'

'This is Jane Leeson. Our dome's being attacked! Please you must send
help...'

Jane stopped as she heard from outside a human scream rend the air,
unmistakably that of her husband. She dropped the earphones and rushed to the
door to go out. But the door was already filled with something infinitely more
terrifying than she had ever imagined in her wildest dreams.

Jane retreated backwards into the room. 'No,' she whispered, finding it
almost impossible to speak. 'Do you understand what I say? Please don't touch
me. I'll do anything... We'll go away... We'll leave the planet - all of us! But
please don't kill me!'

Then she fainted.



5 Starvation

After Jo had been taken to supper by Mary Ashe, and the Lessons had gone
back to their dome, the Doctor spent some time with Ashe discussing the
colonists' basic problem - how tomake their crops grow. Ashe, a reasonable man,
accepted the Doctor's story that he and Jo were simply travellers in space, and
had nothing to do with the mining combines that the colonists feared so much.

'What convinced you,' asked the Doctor, 'that crops would grow on this
planet?'

'I visited this planet when I was a member of the crew of an astro-merchant-
ship,' said Ashe. 'It has atmosphere that humans can breathe, and a temperature
that humans can tolerate with comfort. The soil was exhausted, but I decided it
could be reclaimed.'

'How?'
'Plant a cover crop,' Ashe said, 'plough it in, and repeat the process. That

way we should have had a subsistence crop within a year. But even the cover
crop refuses to grow.'

'What exhausted the soil originally?' asked the Doctor.
Ashe shrugged. 'The Primitives, I suppose. Before they were Primitives.'
The Doctor asked Ashe to tell him about the people called 'the Primitives'.

Ashe explained that they were a simple people, similar to humans except for
their six-fingered hands 'They don't wear any clothes at all,' said Ashe, 'which
shocked some of our lady colonists a bit at first. Instead, they paint their bodies
all over with dyes that they make somehow from the rocks.'

The Doctor asked, 'What do they live on?'
'The shrubs,' replied Ashe. 'I think they're half-starved most of the time.

They're just clinging to existence. But they're not a people struggling to develop.
They're going backwards.'

The Doctor found this intriguing. 'What makes you say that?'
'Wait till you see them,' said Ashe. 'Oh, don't worry, they carry spears but

they're pretty harmless if you treat them gently. At least, that's how I've found
them.Now about going backwards... Although they don't wear clothes, theywear
belts and necklaces, sometimes arm bands, and these are always decorated with
bits of machinery.'

'What sort of machinery?'
'Shaped bits of metal,' said Ashe, 'that must have come from something.

Maybe nuts, or bolts, or springs, or - just shaped bits of metal.'
The Doctor asked where the Primitives lived. Ashe explained that, so far

as he knew, they lived in caves. 'You're fairly safe with them,' Ashe said
reassuringly, 'so long as you don't go near their caves. That's when they get nasty.
Then, and if ever they see a child's doll.'

'Dolls make them nasty?' asked the Doctor, even more intrigued.
'One of them was in here one day,' said Ashe, 'scrounging food, and my

daughter happened to bring a little doll - one she'd had since she was a child -
front her belongings. The Primitive almost went mad...'



And it was at this point that Mary Ashe came rushing back, accompanied
by Jo, with the news of Jane Lesson's radio message. 'All she said was, “Our
dome's being attacked. Please you must send help.” Then she cut off.'

'Did she say what was attacking them?' asked the Doctor.
'No,' said Mary, near to tears. 'But I could hear by her voice - it was

something awful.'
'I'll get my gun,' said Ashe, and started to move off to one of the corridors.
'Don't you need to go with other men?' Jo asked.
Ashe paused. 'We've sent the outer men to the Martin's place. That's the

other end of the colony. You all stay here.' With, that, Ashe hurried away.
The Doctor turned to Mary Ashe. 'Could this be Primitives attacking?'
Mary shook her head. 'No, I don't think so. We get on with the Primitives

quite well.'
'Except,' said the Doctor, 'when one of them saw a doll of yours.'
Mary had to think back. 'Oh, that was ages ago. Yes, he got very excited

and wanted to take it from use. I let him. That seemed to make him happy.'
'What did he do with it?' the Doctor asked.
'Held it to himself,' Mary said, 'as if to protect it from of all people. Then

he ran away with it.'
Ashe returned carrying one of the futuristic-looking shotguns 'I'll go to the

Leesons' place as fast as I can,' he told Mary. 'You get on the radio and see if
you can get anyone else to go over there - armed.'

'I shall go with you,' said the Doctor.
'No, Doctor,' said Jo. 'It may be dangerous.'
'A very good reason for going,' the Doctor said. He turned to Ashe. 'Are

you ready?'
Ashe thought for a moment. 'All right. But at your own risk, mind. Now

Mary, get on that radio!'
The Doctor followed Ashe out into the darkness. The clear night sky was

bright with stars, not all like white pinhead dots as seen from Earth but some
close enough to appear as small discs of intense light. With such a radiant night
sky it was easy to see the shapes of the hills all around the main dome. Ashe
strode ahead in a dead straight line for the Leeson' dome. He said not a word to
the Doctor as he went ahead purposefully. Finally, they came to the crest of a
little rocky hill and Ashe paused to look down. In the valley a few hundred yards
ahead of them they saw two or three lights moving about, the flashlights of other
men who had arrived there first.

'We. aren't alone!' Ashe charged down the hill towards the lights, calling,
'Hello! Is everything all right?'

The Doctor ran after Ashe, taking care not to trip and fall headlong on to
the rocky uninviting ground. When he came up with Ashe just outside the little
dome, Ashe was staring at something on the ground. Another man was standing
close by; it was the young man called Winton whom the Doctor had seen at the
meeting in the main dome. Winton had a torch in his hand.

'It's no good,' Winton was saying, 'he's dead.'
'I want to see,' Ashe said.



Winton pointed his torch at the object on the ground. It was Leeson's body.
The face and chest had been hacked as though by knives. There was blood
everywhere. Winton switched off his torch.

'What about the woman?' asked the Doctor.
'The same,' said Winton. 'They're bringing her body out now.'
Ashe stood staring at the form lying on the ground, then crossed to the

dome. Winton and the Doctor followed, saying nothing. As they approached the
door, two other colonists came out carrying a make-do stretcher. On it lay the
body of Jane Leeson.

'We thought of taking them both to the main dome,' one of the men said to
Ashe, partly as a question.

'Yet' said Ashe. 'I suppose that's the right thing to do.' He turned to the
Doctor rather shamefacedly. 'We never reckoned on people dying or being killed
in the colony. We'll have to work out what to do.'

The three men waited until the stretcher had been carried out. Then they
entered the little dome. The simple furniture had all been wrecked. 'We found her
over here,' said Winton, indicating the radio-telephone. 'He was outside, where
you saw him.'

'How did you get here before us?' asked the Doctor.
'We were patrolling,' said Winton. 'We heard the thing.'
'Did you get a shot at it?' asked Ashe.
'Yes,' said Winton. 'All three of us blazed away like mad.'
'So you actually saw it?' the Doctor said.
'For a few moments,' said Winton. 'Like a big lizard it was, from the picture

books.'
The Doctor found the last remark strange, then remembered that these

people of the year 2972 had probably never seen any real animals. All the Earth
animals had been systematically exterminated by Mankind by the year 2500.

Ashe asked,
'Where did it go?'
'It vanished,' said Winton. 'Just vanished into the darkness.'
While Ashe and Winton discussed the possibility of finding blood tracks -

assuming the monster had been hit - the Doctor examined what appeared to be
claw marks in the wood of the smashed kitchen table. From a claw mark it is
possible to estimate the size of the claw, and from the size of a claw, one can
calculate the probable size of the animal.

'This monster,' said the Doctor to Winton, 'was it about twenty feet high?'
'Feet?' said Winton, puzzled.
The Doctor had forgotten that Earth had completely converted to metric

measurements a thousand years ago. 'About six metres high?' he repeated.
'That's right,' said Winton. Then, suspiciously, he added, 'How do you

know?'
'The size of these claw marks,' said the Doctor. 'And you found Mrs.

Leeson's body by the radio-telephone?'
Winton nodded.
'Then we have a rather strange problem,' said the Doctor, 'because how

could a twenty foot high - I mean, six metres high - lizard come through that
door?'



6 The Survivor

John Ashe felt that his whole world was starting to fall to pieces. It hadn't
been easy finding a group of people who might mix well together in a colony.
Of the many people who replied to his advertisements, he had turned down the
majority because they were too young, or too old, or just didn't seem right in
some way or other. After each interview Ashe had taken the decision whether
to accept or reject the applicant. Then, of the many secondhand spaceships that
he looked at, he had decided which to buy for the group. The others all had their
own ideas on how much food to take, but finally it was left to Ashe to decide
on the exact quantities. He was now tired of taking decisions, but he knew that
if he showed his feelings to the others the whole colony would collapse. They
expected him to lead, and he tried not to let them down.

Then came trouble on the journey, when the spaceship almost blew itself
to pieces shortly after lift-off. With the help of Leeson and Winton, both good
engineers in their own ways, Ashe solved that problem. The journey took longer
than they expected, but once they had landed everyone was happy. Then they
saw the Primitives, and some of the women were terrified. Some of the younger
men, who had never possessed a gun before, wanted to shoot the Primitives. Ashe
had restrained them, and explained that they could and must live in peace with
these strange people. The first days of sowing seeds brought great excitement
because none of them had ever done physical work before; on Earth machines
did everything. But the excitement soon gave way to aching backs and calloused
hands, and sheer tiredness. Ashe had explained that this was part of their new
life, and that they would get used to it. Then the crops failed to grow. And now
two of the colonists had been killed - by a monster six metres high who could
somehow enter a door less than two metres high.

By the time the Lessons' bodies had been carried to the main dome, the
first rays of their alien sun were shooting like fiery fingers into the eastern sky.
All the colonists had come to the main dome, and now they all looked at Ashe
and expected him to do something, to take another decision. When people died
on Earth it was always in a hospital, and the hospital operatives sent the bodies
to a crematorium. Ashe looked at the two bodies laid side by side on make-do
stretchers in the main area of the big dome, each covered now in old sheets, and
wondered what he ought to do. It was impossible to build a fire such as they had
in the crematoria, because they could never find enough wood.

It was this stranger, the Doctor, who somehow saw into Ashe's troubled
mind and came up to him and spoke very quietly 'You'll have to bury them.'

Now Ashe remembered reading an old audiobook about burying dead
people, back in the time when Earth still had open land. 'Yes,' he said, 'we must
dig holes.'

' Graves ,' said the Doctor, so quietly that no one else could hear.
'Yes,' said Ashe, 'graves.'
'I have already asked two of your men to start preparing them,' whispered

the Doctor. 'You and I must be pall-bearers.'



Ashe didn't understand him at first. But the Doctor went to the end of one
of the stretchers, and Ashe realised he was expected to go to the other end. Two
of the other men present got the idea, and went to lift the other stretcher. The
Doctor lifted, and Ashe lifted, and the sad little procession left the main dome.
All the other colonists followed in silence.

As the Doctor led the way to where two other colonists with spades were
waiting by freshly dug graves, he turned his head and spoke over his shoulder to
Ashe. 'Tell your daughter to have tea or coffee or something ready for our return.'

Ashe was bewildered. 'Why?'
'I'll explain afterwards,' said the Doctor.
Ashe called his daughter over to him as he walked carrying the stretcher,

and gave her the order. She, at least, never questioned him. From the corner of
his eye he saw her hurrying back to the main dome.

At last they were beside the holes, which the Doctor called graves. Here
Ashe was glad to let the Doctor take over. The Doctor had ropes ready, so that
the two bodies could be lowered gently down into their respective graves.

'Thanks,' said Ashe, glad that someone knew what to do.
'Now we have a service,' said the Doctor. 'What religion were they?'
'Religion?' said Ashe, not understanding.
'You must stand here and say some nice things about them both,' said the

Doctor, still in no more than a whisper. 'You must say that they did not die for
nothing.'

'Why?' asked Ashe.
'Because,' said the Doctor, 'all these people standing here expect it. They

don't know that they expect it, because they've never met death before, not on
your computerised, sanitised Earth.'

Ashe looked at the colonists. They were all standing there, eyes to the
ground. waiting for something. 'All right,' he told the Doctor. 'I'll try.' He cleared
his throat. He was used to speaking to the whole group, but never before like this.
'We shall miss Jane and Eric Leeson. Jane was always kind, and kept her head
when the spaceship nearly blew up. Eric was a hard worker, and never afraid
of anything. Some of you may think that they died for nothing. But they didn't,
not really... they died trying to make a better life, not only for themselves, but
for all of us. We shall not forget them.' He stopped and looked at the Doctor for
approval. The Doctor nodded, picked up some of the dug out soil in his hand and
dropped it into first one grave then the other. Then the Doctor walked off quietly
towards the main dome. Almost involuntarily Ashe did the same, picking up a
few grammes of the powdery soil, and scattering them onto the corpses within
the graves. Then he, too, walked away. One by one the other colonists did the
same, scattering the soil of their planet onto their dead friends.

Back at the main dome Mary, helped by Jo, had synthetic tea waiting for
them all. Ashe found the Doctor already there, joking with Mary about
something. Ashe went up to him.

'Thanks,' he said. 'But is this a time for jokes?'
The Doctor drew Ashe away from the two girls, now busy serving tea to

the other colonists as they sadly trooped back inside. 'To live away from your
Earth,' said the Doctor, 'you've got to learn more than how to sow seed and use



a plough. With death, there has to be a time for tears, and then a time to rejoice
in the continuation of life. Hence the tea.'

'How do you know all these things?' asked Ashe.
'You might say, said the Doctor, 'that I'm something of an historian. Except

that to me the past, the present, and the future are all one.'
'All one?' said Ashe 'That's impossible!'
But there was no time to pursue their talk. Martin, the colonist who had

first seen a monster, came up to them. He talked loudly so, that all the others
could hear. 'It's no good, Ashe. We've got to admit defeat! We've got to go back
to Earth!'

Ashe said, 'We've invested a year of our lives into this planet. We've got
the beginnings of a colony...'

Martin didn't want to listen, and cut in, 'We can't even support ourselves,
and now two of us are dead.'

'I wonder if I might join in the discussion?' enquired the Doctor.
Now young Winton came forward, to support Martin. 'This has nothing to

do with you, whoever you are!'
'The Doctor is our guest,' Ashe reminded them. 'Please let him speak.'
'All right,' said Martin. 'But make it short.'
'What I have to say is very simple,' said the Doctor. 'I've spent some time

studying your crop records. I believe that growth is inhibited by some unnatural
force. We must isolate it and overcome it.'

'What about the monsters?' asked one of the women colonists. 'Can we have
children grow up in a place overrun with monsters?'

'For a start,' said the Doctor, 'we know it isn't overrun with them. Only two
have been sighted - and for that matter, it may be the same one seen twice. Now
are you going to run like children from terrors in the dark?'

This quietened the colonists for a moment. None of them wanted to admit
to being afraid. Ashe took the opportunity to speak again, 'This colony is our
only chance, friends. If we leave it, we'll have nothing. If we stay, we may have
a chance.'

It was Mrs. Martin, who herself had been terrorised by the monsters, who
spoke up for Ashe's attitude. 'I think he's right. We've put too much work into
this place to leave it now.'

'You see,' said Ashe, spurred on by Mrs. Martin's support, 'there's a chance
if we keep pulling together. What we've got to do is to organise patrols for all
the domes. The Doctor will help its with the agricultural problems...'

Ashe's voice trailed off as he saw the man stagger in through the main
entrance He was only about twenty-five years old, but his sunken eyes and
hungry face made him look fifty. His clothes were in tatters. As he entered the
dome he stood there for a moment as though trying to say something, then fell
forward to the ground. Mary and Jo were the first to reach the man's side. Ashe
and the Doctor quickly followed with all the colonists crowding around. The
Doctor gently turned theman over onto his back;Mary raised his head. Jo hurried
away to get the man something to drink.

Ashe asked, 'Where are you from?'



The man opened his mouth, but he was too parched to speak. Jo brought
one of the little cups of synthetic tea, and put it to the man's lips. As he drank
greedily the Doctor asked Ashe, 'Isn't he one of your colonists?'

'No.' Ashe again spoke to the man, 'Can you understand me?Where are you
from?'

'Colony,' the man said.
Now Winton also crouched by the man. 'There's another colony on this

planet?'
The man tried to nod his head. 'I've been wandering... for weeks... hundred

of kilometres... wandering.' He seemed ready to faint.
Winton shook the man roughly. 'The other colonists, your friends. Where

are they?'
The man's eyes closed, then opened again suddenly, and stared straight up

at Winton. 'A year of hunger... crops wouldn't grow... then the lizards.' He closed
his eyes tight, and his weather-beaten hands clawed into the ground as some
memory of terror swept through his mind. 'Giant lizards... so many of them...
then the Primitives.'

'The other colonists in your group,' Winton insisted, again shaking the man,
'where are they?'

'All dead,' the man said. 'Every one of them... killed...'



7 The Robot

Ashe and the Doctor walked slowly back to the Leeson' wrecked dome.
The Doctor particularly wanted to see the damage again in daylight; and Ashe
wanted to talk privately with the Doctor.

'What should I do?' asked Ashe.
'For the time being,' said the Doctor, 'try to keep an open mind.'
'After what that man Norton said?' Ashe was referring to the survivor from

the other colony. He had not yet regained consciousness but they had found his
name on a letter in his pocket. 'There's no hope for us.'

'How do you think Man first made out on Earth?' asked the Doctor. 'He
had to fight sabre-toothed tigers, rampaging mammoths, diseases of all sorts. He
survived.'

'But how many died in the struggle?' said Ashe. 'In the natural fight for
survival, it's only a few who live through it. I've got to think about the lives of
human beings, not a set of statistics.'

'Maybe I'll find out something here,' said the Doctor, indicating the dome
that they had now reached. 'Anyway, we shall see.'

Ashe remained outside, staring blindly at Leeson's blood now dried on the
rocky ground. The Doctor went into the dome, but he found himself with
company, two Primitives were searching around among the wreckage. When
they saw the Doctor they both immediately turned and drew long knives from
their belts, raising them in defiance. With their painted bodies and faces, and
bright yellow hair, they were a fearsome sight.

'I mean you no harm,' said the Doctor slowly and distinctly, not expecting
them to understand, but hoping that the tone of his voice might put them at ease.

Then Ashe entered behind the Doctor. Immediately the Primitives lowered
their knives. 'This is a friend,' said Ashe.

'Do they have a language of their own?' the Doctor asked.
'I've never heard them speak,' saidAshe. 'But they seem to understandwhat I

say.' He spoke up loudly again, to address the Primitives. 'What have you taken?'
The Primitives didn't move.
Ashe held out his hand, palm up. 'Come on now, I know you've taken

something. It's all right if I give you things, but you mustn't take them.'
One of the Primitives untied from his belt a leather pouch, opened it and

brought out a domestic tin opener, which he put into Ache's hand.
'Is that all?' said Ashy
The other Primitive also had a pouch, and produced a hair brush for Ashe.
'More,' said Ashe.
The first Primitive dipped his six-fingered hand into his pouch again and

produced a little packet of biscuits. He looked at the biscuits rather sadly, wetting
his lips with his tongue as though enjoying the treat at least in his imagination,
then made to put the packet into Ashe's hand. Ashe withdrew it. 'You can keep
the food,' he said.

Both the Primitives bared their teeth and hissed loudly, a sign of pleasure.
'All right,' said Ashc, 'off with you now.'



The two Primitives raced out of the dome, still baring their teeth and hissing
in ecstasy. Ashe watched after them, then turned back to the Doctor. 'I wonder
how long they'll stay playful like that,' he said. 'Once they know we're beaten,
they'll turn on ac'

'I don't think you really believe that,' said the Doctor. 'Anyway, you're not
beaten yet.' The Doctor knelt down and started very carefully to re-examine the
claw marks on the smashed kitchen table. Ashe watched him for a while.

'What do you hope to find there?' said Ashe.
'I don't know,' said the Doctor, 'until I've found it.'
'Well,' said Ashe, 'I'll leave you to it. I'll be at the main dome.'
Ashe went away, which was exactly what the Doctor wanted. He took a

magnifying-glass from his pocket and inspected one claw mark in detail. The
marks were too regular to be natural. The Doctor needed to put tiny scrapings
of the clawed surface under a powerful miscroscope to learn more about the
true nature of the claw, was it that of an animal, or something made to look like
one? He did not with to carry a whole section of the smashed kitchen table with
him back to the microscope which he had in the TARDIS, so he decided to cut
out a claw mark. He inserted the blade of a very sharp little knife deep into the
wood just at the side of one, at such an angle that the tip of the blade went under
the mark. Then he sliced down the wood, and now repeated the process on the
other side of the claw mark. Now he cut across the wood at the top and bottom
of the gouged out line, so that finally he was able to lift out a sliver of wood
which contained the claw mark. This he put into a test-tube, also taken from his
capacious jacket pockets. Then he froze rigid.

With an earsplitting crash a hole was smashed through the wall of the dome
at the back. Through it marched a metal robot, with arms, legs and head like
those of a man. It made straight for the Doctor, its metal hands waving about in
search of its prey. The Doctor stepped backwards. He stumbled over wrecked
furniture and fell back heavily, banging his head against the dome's metal wall.
The robot turned, seemingly attracted by the sound of the Doctor's fall, then
continued forward again crushing the remains of the kitchen table with its huge
metal feet. Just as a metal hand made contact with the Doctor's face, the robot
stopped dead, lifeless, like a mechanical statue.

'You can get up now.'
From his position on the floor the Doctor couldn't see where the voice was

coming from, but it was human and sounded fairly friendly. TheDoctor struggled
to his feet. A man had followed the robot into the dome, through the hole in
the wall. He was a tough, hardbitten man, in his late thirties. He had on a sort
of uniform jacket and matching tunic, basically black but piped with bright red.
Across the left breast of the tunic was an oval of red piping, and inside that the
letters IMC. In his hand was a very small remote-control unit, a little black box
with buttons and a dial on it, obviously the control box for the robot.

'You ought to keep that thing under better control,' said the Doctor.
'Yes,' said the man. 'Sorry. It's only a Class Three Servo robot, not very

bright.' He looked round the room. 'What happened?'
'Something,' said the Doctor, 'or someone attacked this place last night.May

I ask who you are?'



' Caldwell 's the name,' he said, indicating the initials on his tunic with a
grin. 'Interplanetary Mining Corporation. We're doing a mineral survey. Is this
your place?'

'No,' said the Doctor. 'It belonged to two colonists.'
'Colonists?' said Caldwell , with surprise. 'Earth Control told us this planet

was uninhabited.'
'Then Earth Control,' said the Doctor, 'whatever that is, is wrong.

Presumably you'll move on to another planet for your survey.'
'That's not up to me,' said Caldwell 'They'll have to sort it out at Earth

Control. According to our records this planet has been allocated for mining.' He
grinned. 'Maybe you people chose the wrong planet! It's awful easy, once you're
out in Space!'

'I rather doubt it,' said the Doctor. 'Now if you'll excuse me I have some
work to do...'

The Doctor moved to leave, but Caldwell stepped right in front of him, still
grinning. 'Look, I'm on the way back to my spaceship. How about coming back
there with me?'

'Why?'
'Just trying to be friendly,' said Caldwell . 'Is there any thing wrong with a

little hospitality? We could talk about who's made the big mistake - us or you.'
Friendly as he seemed, Caldwell remained standing firmly between the Doctor
and the door.

'I'm sorry,' said the Doctor, 'but I've got a great deal to do. And I really ought
to tell the colonists that you've arrived here.'

'But they're going to know,' said Caldwell . 'There are no secrets between
friends, and on a desolate place like this we've all got to be friends - or wouldn't
you agree?'

As Caldwell spoke he touched one of the controls on the little black box.
From behind him theDoctor could hear the robot move again, a manœuvre which
brought it close to the Doctor's back.

'I suppose I could spare you a few minutes,' said the Doctor.
'Great,' said Caldwell , (lashing his boyish grin again. He gripped the

Doctor's arm in a friendly way, led the Doctor to the door, then took a last look
round at the shattered furniture. 'Something certainly made a job of wrecking
this place. Good thing no one was hurt.'

'The two colonists who lived here,' the Doctor said, 'were killed.'
Caldwell released his grip on the Doctor's arm. 'Two people - killed?'
The Doctor noticed how shocked Caldwell was with the news of the deaths,

almost as though Caldwell might have known the people who died. 'That's right,'
he said, 'a man and his wife.'

Caldwell passed his hand over his brow. The boyish grin had vanished - he
seemed totally deflated by this news. 'Well,' he murmured after a few seconds,
'the invitation still stands to come and seemy people. They'll be glad to meet you.
I've got a buggy outside.' With that, Caldwell walked out of the dome, apparently
leaving the Doctor free now to follow or to go his own way. Whereas before the
Doctor hadn't wanted to go with Caldwell, feeling it to be his first duty to tell
Ashe about the arrival of an IMC survey team, now he was desperately keen to



stick with Caldwell and try to find out why the news of the colonists' deaths had
had such a marked effect on the man.

The Doctor left the dome. Outside stood a small electrically-powered
vehicle rather like a bicycle with four wheels. Mounted on the chassis were four
simple seating places. Caldwell was already sitting on one of the front seats
before the steering wheel. The Doctor got on the seat beside him. Caldwell was
staring straight ahead of him, as though still shocked by the news of the colonists'
deaths.

'What about your robot?' the Doctor asked.
'What's that?' Caldwell turned to theDoctor. 'Oh yes, Charlie. I nearly forgot

Charlie.' He pressed buttons on the little remote-control box. Within a moment
the robot came walking out of the dome, and obediently climbed up and took its
place on one of the back seats.

'Right,' said Caldwell , 'let's go.'
Caldwell drove in silence, apparently finding his way through reading a

small compass built into the centre of the steering wheel. The Doctor soon
realised that they were heading where he and Jo had left the TARDIS. 'How far
are we going?' he asked the now silent Caldwell . The man grunted a reply to
the effect that they only had a few kilometres to drive, but he didn't say how
many. He drove in a dead straight line, up little hills and down into valleys, then
up again. Nor did he make any effort to steer round the smaller boulders, the
wheels of the buggy were made to bounce over almost any obstacle not larger
than themselves. Eventually, the buggy was rolling down to where the Doctor
and Jo had arrived. The TARDIS was gone.

'Will you stop, please,' asked the Doctor.
'My friends'll want to meet you,' Caldwell said, driving on.
'Afterwards,' said the Doctor. 'But there's something I want to check right

here.' He put so much insistence into his voice that Caldwell stopped the buggy.
The Doctor immediately dismounted and went to the spot where the TARDIS
had materialised after its journey from Earth. He suspected the Time Lords were
really in control when the TARDIS took off from UNIT Headquarters, had they
now dematerialised the TARDIS, leaving both Jo and himself stranded on this
desolate planet for ever?

'Hey', shouted Caldwell , 'if you're trying to run away, I can outpace you
easily with the buggy!'

But the Doctor continued undeterred to the exact point where he had last
seen the TARDIS. Caldwell started the buggy again, and turned it savagely to
pursue the Doctor. But when Caldwell realised the Doctor wasn't running
anywhere, but was simply studying a patch of ground, he slowed down the buggy
and got off to join the Doctor.

'Not that I expected you to run away,' Caldwell said, with a suggestion of
renewed friendship, of trying to make up for an understanding that he wasn't sure
had ever existed, 'but.. well, what are you staring at the ground for?'

'I left something here,' the Doctor said, 'some very valuable equipment.'
'Yes?' Caldwell looked around the area. 'How big was it? What did it look

like?'



'It was like a police...' But the Doctor thought better of it; Caldwell would
never understand. 'It's a tall blue box,' - something caught his eye a little way off
- 'and I've got a very good idea who's taken it!'

What caught his eye were drag marks in the dust - that and a few wisps
of bright yellow hair on the ground. The Doctor hurried over to the marks, then
looked up in the direction they were going. He could see now the trail of the
dragged TARDIS stretching away in a dead straight line towards some hills a
couple of miles across a flat plain.

'The Primitives,' he said to himself. 'Why should they want the TARDIS?'
'What's that?' said Caldwell , not understanding.
'I'm afraid I'll have to leave you,' said the Doctor, 'and find this missing

equipment of mine.'
Caldwell , whose outward good spirits seemed to have returned, grabbed

the Doctor's arm. He gave his most boyish grin. 'But we're going to miss you.'
With his free hand, Caldwell operated the robot's remote-control. 'Charlie's not
going to like it.'

The robot responded by carefully dismounting from the buggy. It lumbered
across towards the Doctor, its metal hands groping in the air ahead of it.

'My grip's nice and friendly,' said Caldwell . 'But Charlie, sometimes he
doesn't know his own strength.' By now the robot had come up to the Doctor.
Caldwell pressed another button, and a metal hand encircled the Doctor's other
arm.

'Couldn't you spare the time to have morning coffee with us,' said Caldwell ,
'if only to make Charlie happy?'

'Kindly tell this metal moron to take its hand off me,' said the Doctor.
'Metal moron?' said Caldwell . 'Charlie isn't going to like that kind of talk.'
Caldwell brought his thumb down hard onto another button on his hand-

held control unit. The Doctor nerved himself to feel the robot's grip tighten and
crush the bone of his arm. Instead, from what served as the robot's mouth the
Doctor heard a crude recording of what he had just said.

' Kindly tell this metal moron to take its hand off me, ' came from the mouth
of the robot. This was followed by guffaws of metallic laughter, from somewhere
within the robot's head.

Caldwell grinned at the Doctor's seeming surprise. 'You see - me and
Charlie are just a couple of jokers.' He pressed another button, and the robot's
hand came away from the Doctor's arm. 'Shall we get back in the buggy now,'
he said, 'and all be friends?'

'All right,' said the Doctor. 'Since you insist,'



8 The Men from IMC

Captain Dent sat in his captain's chair in the control room of the
Interplanetary Mining Corporation spaceship, his eyes on the monitor screen.
As a television eye in the body of the spaceship slowly moved round the ship's
circumference, it projected onto the monitor screen a panning picture of the
planet's rocky, slightly undulating surface. Despite years of service with IMC, it
still gave Dent a thrill to sit inside the comfort and protection of a ship and be
able to see everything that was outside.

As he sat there, his hands moved from one to another of the controls. He
knew each lever and knob by touch, and exactly how much power he could exert
with each of them, energy measured not only in thrust of the spaceship's motors
but also in the destructive force of the weapons every IMC ship carried. Sitting
like that, in his special captain's chair, with his hands gently touching and
stroking the controls, he was always reminded of the power of the Interplanetary
Mining Corporation and his place within that organisation. When he was a child
his father had told him, 'You've got to work hard at school and at university,
and then you must get into one of the big corporations and stay there, and they'll
look after you.' He had listened to his father's advice. He had never wanted to
be like his uncle, a man who had changed jobs many times in his life and still
had no real position in the world. From the beginning, Dent wanted to work up
to a good job, and that meant getting into a really big corporation and staying
there. He was lucky enough to join IMC at the age of 20, one of five successful
applicants that term out of seventeen thousand. Immediately, he got a room of
his own to live in, a rare privilege for any unmarried man on the overcrowded
planet Earth. He was given six months' training on spaceship maintenance; he
studied day and night and never took the elevator up to the sunshine or went for
Walks or attended parties. He graduated with honours. It was then that they gave
him his special IMC uniform, piped with red, and sent him as a crew member on
his first mission with a survey ship looking for much-needed minerals on other
planets. On his return to Earth he not only got his share of the crew's bonus, but
also a note telling him to report to the IMC personnel manager's office.

'We like your work,' said the personnel manager, 'and we want to promote
you to First Officer for your text trip. However, I see from your file that you're
not married.'

'That is correct, sir,' said Dent.
The personnel manager smiled, a smile that reminded Dent of his own

father. 'The Corporation likes its First Officers, and its Captains of course, to be
married. It makes a man feel more secure. Got any on in mind?'

'No, sir,' said Dent. He had always remembered his father's advice that the
big corporations much preferred to choose the wives and husbands for their
employees, so he hadn't tried to find a wife.

'Then let IMC help you,' beamed the personnel manager. 'I'll just run the
details from your file through the computer, and see who it matches up with,
and we'll have a nice wife and home waiting for you when you get back from
your next trip!'



Six months later Dent returned to Earth again, this time with a bigger bonus.
In the envelope with the bonus statement was a key bearing an address tag. This
was his new home. His wife was waiting for him, quite a pretty young woman
with short hair dyed dull blue, as was the fashion that month. 'Are you my
husband?' she said as he let himself in.

'I imagine I will be,' he answered, looking round his new home. It had two
rooms, a shower, a lavatory, and a tiny kitchen. He was amazed at the influence
wielded by IMC which could get him anywhere to live in as big as this.

'It's all fixed,' said the girl. 'IMC had our State records stapled together in
the Automatic Personnel File, so we're already married.'

'That's fine,' Dent said, still looking about his new living quarters. 'What's
that?' He pointed to a set of knobs and dials in the tiny kitchen.

The girl explained it was the infra-red cooker, and spent the next hour
showing Dent all the gadgets in their home. Finally he asked, 'Do you know how
much all this is going to cost me '

'I worked it out,' said the girl. 'Even if they make you up to Captain in a
year, with your earnings you'll pay off IMC for all this in about twenty years'
time. But, of course, by then we'll have moved to somewhere bigger, and there'll
be children, so I imagine you'll be paying back IMC for just about the rest of
your life!'

She laughed. It was a very pretty laugh. And now, for the first time, Dent
really noticed her in among all the other gadgets of his new home. Over the next
few days of leave he found that the IMC match-making computer had done a
good job, and that the two of them were going to be very happy together. Two
years later they had their first child, then their second, and both children were
now in a school owned and run by IMC solely for the children of IMC staff.

As Dent sat there, touching the controls of the IMC spaceship, he felt happy
and secure in the fact that he was an IMCman, with an IMC wife, IMC children,
with a beautiful four room IMC home. His present and his future were as secure
as IMC, and IMC would go on for ever.

These pleasant thoughts were pushed from his mind by the arrival of First
Officer Morgan, who came hurrying into the control roomwith a file in his hand.
'I've just got the first survey results from the computer, Captain, he said, showing
Dent the file. 'There's enough duralinium on this planet to build a million living
units on Earth.'

'Excellent,' said Dent. He had trained his mind to switch instantly from one
set of thoughts to another. All the personal memories were now switched off,
and he was eagerly scanning his eyes down the set of figures on the computer
print-out contained in the file.

Morgan said, 'I can't think how this planet ever got assigned for
colonisation, can you, Captain?'

'Does it really matter?' said Dent, still eagerly reading the figures.
'Look,' said Morgan, ' Caldwell seems to have found a colonist for us.'
Dent looked up at the monitor. On it they could see Caldwell on the buggy

driving straight towards them. Seated by Caldwell was a tall man with curly fair
hair dressed in a knee-length black jacket and a frilly white shirt. The robot sat
at the rear.

Morgan was amused, 'Why's he wearing fancy dress?'



'All colonists are eccentric,' said Dent, which was something he had once
read in an IMC handbook on interplanetary sociology. 'Otherwise they wouldn't
be colonists. They're drop-outs from society.'

By now the buggy had gone out of range of the outside television eye, so
presumably it was too close in to the spaceship, it had probably stopped by the
outside entrance, and its passengers would be in the process of dismounting.

Morgan asked, 'What are you going to say to this eccentric?'
'The usual story,' said Dent. 'We've only just arrived, and we are surprised

and shocked to discover that the planet has been colonised.'
'Why couldn't we just blast them off the planet?' Morgan said. 'We've got

the weapons.'
Dent closed the file and looked up at Morgan. 'Politics, dear boy. Earth

Government is supposed to care for all its people, not only the interests of big
business.' He smiled. 'We have to do things in a legal way.'

'I did everything the way you told me, sir,' said Morgan. 'But it seems such
a long way to go about things.'

'Maybe,' said Dent. 'But the IMC way is best. You're young. You'll learn.'
He heard Caldwell 's heavy footsteps coming along the main connecting corridor
and quickly put the survey file out of sight in case Caldwell had the colonist with
him. But Caldwell entered alone, and very angry.

'I've just come across a colonist,' Caldwell exploded. 'He says two people
were killed last night!' He swung round on Morgan, 'You're only supposed to
scare them, Morgan, not slaughter them!'

Dent was also annoyed with this news, but for different reasons. 'Did you
know about this, Morgan?'

'He must have known!' bellowed Caldwell .
'Let him answer,' Dent said. He turned back to Morgan, who looked scared

of Caldwell 's anger. 'Well?'
'It was an accident,' Morgan said, his face flushed with guilt. 'They found

me and started shooting.'
'You acted very foolishly,' said Dent. 'You should not have let them see you.'
Caldwell returned to his attack on Dent. 'Is that all you can say? That

Morgan was “foolish”?!'
Dent hated rows. During arguments people exposed what was really going

on in their minds, and Dent never wanted other people to know what he was
thinking. He said nothing for amoment, then retrieved the survey file fromwhere
he had put it out of sight. He opened the file under Caldwell 's nose. 'Look at
these figures, Caldwell . This planet's got enough duralinium to double IMC's
profits next year. Your own bonus will be big enough to retire on.'

Caldwell stared at the report. Dent watched Caldwell 's eyes as they sped
from line to line of the figures.

One of the many lessons Dent had learnt from the IMC Staff Management
School , which he attended for six months before becoming a Captain, was that
money overcomes most staff problems.

'You're sure this survey is correct?' Caldwell asked.
'The computer's never been wrong,' said Dent. Caldwell drew a deep breath,

a sign that he was seeing Dent's point of view. 'All right,' he said. 'But no more
killings.'



Dent snapped that the file. 'Agreed. Where is your colonist?'
'I left him in the crew room,' said Caldwell .
That was a mistake. Non-IMC people should never be left alone anywhere

in an IMC spaceship. But Dent just said, 'Fine. I'll go and see him.' He put the file
away again, left the control room and went down the connecting corridor to the
crew room. The doorwas locked on the outside, andDent was pleased to note that
Caldwell had shown at least some sense. He turned the holding bolt, and quietly
opened the door. The eccentric-looking man he had seen on the monitor with
Caldwell was standing watching the screen of the crew's entertainment console
which no doubt Caldwell had turned on for him. On the screen was an architect's
drawing of high-rise living units on a floating island in the sea. A woman's voice
came from the console, explaining the drawings. 'With every square metre of
the Earth's land masses now covered with building complexes,' said the voice,
'scientists have turned to new means for providing accommodation for our ever-
growing population. These floating islands, rising to three hundred storeys, will
provide living space for five hundred million people...' The man, apparently
aware that Dent was watching his back, switched off the console and turned
round. 'Welcome on board,' said Dent, crossing to the man with his hand
extended. 'My name's Captain Dent. It's a pleasure to meet you, Mr. - '

'Not Mister,' said the man. 'Just Doctor.'
They shook hands.
Dent said, 'I'm surprised and shocked to find colonists on this planet. It

seems your people made some navigational error coming here. This planet's
classified for mining. Still, IMC is always willing to help brave, adventurous
people such as yourselves. So if there's any way we can help you to get on your
way, just tell us how.'

'I think you're mistaken,' said the Doctor. 'This planet is classified for
colonisation.'

Dent had no intention to pursue this argument, at least not now. He said,
'But it's such an awful place to live! And I understand it's infested with some
hostile animal life.'

'I find that extremely puzzling,' said the Doctor.
Dent took a careful look at the Doctor. The man hadn't got the weather-

beaten face and rough, calloused hands of the typical colonist, the type of people
Dent had met on many other planets; not only that, but the man's clothes didn't
look like a colonist's work clothes. Perhaps the man was some kind of interfering
inspector from Earth Government. 'Puzzling?' said Dent. 'Why?'

'When giant dinosaurs lived on planet Earth,' said the Doctor, 'that planet
was covered in lush, tropical vegetation which fed them. There is little vegetation
here.'

'Maybe they're flesh eaters,' said Dent.
'Then what flesh do they eat,' asked the Doctor. 'I've seen no signs of other

animals here.'
If there was one thing Dent hated it was people who could think and reason.

It was that kind of person who always caused trouble. He dearly wanted to put a
bullet through the Doctor as he stood there. Instead, he smiled. 'I don't understand
all that stuff,' he said, pretending to be a simple, nonscientific man, 'but these



creatures seem to exist and they're killers. Surely you and your fellow colonists
don't want to spend your lives fighting monsters?'

'As it happens,' said the Doctor, 'I'm not a colonist, I'mmerely a visitor here.'
'May I ask on what business?' said Dent.
'Certainly youmay,' said the Doctor; 'my own. However, I'm very interested

in what the colonists are trying to do. It's possible that these giant lizards can be
found and destroyed, or at least deterred from harming the colonists.'

'Is that what the colonists think?' said Dent. This is really what he wanted
to know.

'They expected difficulties when they came here, said the Doctor. 'But with
patience they will survive.'

Dent knew he was near to losing his temper. 'But they shouldn't be here at
all! My corporation has been assigned the mineral rights. You know how Earth
desperately needs minerals!'

'Earth's needs,' mused the Doctor, 'or your corporation's profits?'
'What's good for IMC is good for Earth,' said Dent rather smugly, realising

that he was now blustering against the Doctor's calm. 'There are over a hundred
thousand million people back on Earth, and they need all the minerals we can
find!'

'What those people need,' said the Doctor, 'are new worlds to live on, like
this one. Worlds where they can live like human beings again, instead of like
battery hens.

'That's not my concern,' said Dent. 'Minerals are needed. It's my job to get
them.'

'Even if that reduces this planet to a slag heap?' said the Doctor. 'Now if
you'll excuse me, I have lost some important equipment. I most go and look for
it.'

An idea was already forming in Dent's mind as to how he could get rid of
the Doctor by way of an 'accident'. 'What sort of equipment?' Dent asked.

'It's rather difficult to explain,' said the Doctor. 'You might say it is a tall
blue box.'

Dent pretended to lose interest in the Doctor's lost equipment. 'Well, at least
I can arrange transport for you back to your colonist friends. Wait here, please.'

'This time,' said the Doctor, as Dent was closing the door, 'do you mind not
locking we in?'

'It's normal security procedure,' said Dent, 'when non-IMC personnel are
on board. You won't be locked in for long.' He closed the door, and turned the
locking knob. He stood in the corridor for a moment, thinking. He knew he had
conducted the interview badly and was not much of a credit to IMC. Then he
reminded himself that normally he didn't have to contend with intelligent people
like the Doctor. Once colonists had been scared by monsters, they were usually
only too happy to accept IMC's help to move them on to another planet. This
time it would be different, at least until he had disposed of the Doctor. He went
back up the connecting corridor to the control room. Morgan was alone.

'Where's Caldwell ?' Dent asked.
'He got called down by the motor room people, sir,' replied Morgan, 'some

minor problem they've got.'



'Uh-huh.' Dent slumped down into his special captain's chair. 'This man he
brought in, he isn't a colonist. I think he's some kind of scientist. He noticed the
vegetation here doesn't fit in with the existence of monsters'

'Could he be working for Earth Government,' said Morgan, 'checking up
on us?'

'Maybe,' said Dent. 'Anyway, I want you to drive him back to the colonists'
place.'

'If he's going to cause trouble,' said Morgan, 'why not keep him here?'
'No,' said Dent, 'there would be questions. When Caldwell found him, he

was investigating the wrecked dome. Right?'
'Right,' said Morgan.
'So,' Dent continued, 'if his body were found in the wreck, it would be

obvious that the monsters had gone back and killed him.'
Morgan got up. 'Leave it to me, sir.'
'He says he's lost some equipment,' said Dent. 'You offer to help him find

it - you know, play him along. That'll give me time to get the robot over to the
wrecked dome to meet him there.'

'Thank you, sir,' said Morgan. He was eager to go and had his hand on the
door knob.

'One final point,' said Dent. 'Nothing must go wrong.'
'I'll make sure of that, sir,' said Morgan, turning the knob of the door. But

Dent still had more to say.
'You should have told me last night about those two colonists being killed,'

Dent went on. 'On this planet I represent IMC, and you must always tell the
Corporation everything, even when you make a mistake.'

'Yes, sir,' said Morgan. 'Sorry, sir.'
'That's all right,' said Dent. 'Now get on your way. And make it look good
Morgan hurried away. Dent liked Morgan. Morgan was ambitious and

totally unscrupulous. Dent felt you could always trust people like that.



9 The Spy

From the moment of his arrival at the colonists' main dome, IMC Second
OfficerWilfred Norton had been treated as a Very Important Person. That's what
he liked about playing the 'survivor' every time Captain Dent arrived at a new
planet. In his heart he had wanted to become an actor, but his father and mother
told him that he ought to get work with one of the big corporations. Now he had
the comfort and security of working for one of the biggest, IMC, and he had the
chance to do some very real-life acting.

After his dramatic entrance, when he said that he was the sole survivor from
another colony, the colonists washed him, fed him, and gave him clean clothes
to wear. And now he was being given a tour of inspection by this young fellow
called Winton. There were many rooms and corridors in the main dome, and he
was being shown a small room one side of which was packed with the colony's
main electrical junction and fuses. Compared with gleaming equipment inside
the IMC spaceship, this tangle of wires and switches looked like a mess that
would shame a junkyard. A man was working on one of the switches, removing
it from a rough make-do control panel; he was being 'helped' by a Primitive.

'This is our power supply junction-box,' said Winton. 'This is Holden, our
electrician.' He turned to Holden. 'This is Wilf Norton.'

Holden shook hands with Norton. 'Yes, I remember you coming in. You
must have had a rough time.' Holden turned back to his work, but asked Norton
about how he had survived so long alone on the planet, and Norton gave in
answer the story that he had rehearsed so well. As they talked Holden removed
the switch, obviously broken, and was about to drop it on the floor, when the
Primitive reached out for it.

'Sorry,' said Holden with a smile, 'that's for you.'
The Primitive took the discarded switch and quickly attached it to his belt

which already carried various bits of broken machinery.
'What's he doing?' said Norton, indicating the Primitive.
'He's my assistant,' said Holden. As he spoke he. reached out for a particular

screwdriver on his little work bench; but the Primitive had already picked it up
and was offering it to Holden. 'You see? He gets the right tool every time. Seems
to know what's in my mind.' Holden started to use the screwdriver to install a
newer switch.

'Our Primitives weren't that friendly,' said Norton. 'Where do you get your
power from?'

Winton answered, 'We tap the old spaceship's nuclear generator and beam
power through to the domes as they need it.' He turned to Holden. 'What's the
trouble this time?'

'Same as before,' said Holden. 'All this stuff's had its time. Still, we soldier
on.'

Norton followed Winton further down the corridor to the dome's dining
area. The two girls, Mary and Jo, were cooking some stew. An idea was forming
in Norton's mind, a plan that he wanted to carry out as quickly as possible. But
first, while Winton still stayed with him, he had to talk to these two girls.



'That smells nice,' he said. 'What is it?'
'Only stew, I'm afraid,' said the girl called Mary. 'Whatever it is,' Norton

said, 'I'm looking forward to it. For months I've lived on the roots of scrub.' He
tamed to Winton. 'I do appreciate the way you people are looking after me, and
your showing me around the place. But if you want to get on with your work
now, I'll be all right.' He gave Winton a big wink which the girls didn't see, and
nodded his head towards Mary. Winton got the point. Norton hadn't spoken to
a girl for months, and maybe he had taken a fancy to Mary. 'Well,' said Winton
loudly, 'perhaps I should get on with some work. So, I'll we you later, Wilf.' With
that Winton left the dining-hall.

'That really does smell good,' Norton said. 'About how long before you
serve up?'

'Fifteen or twenty minutes,' Mary said.
'Then I'll go and wash my hands,' Norton said. He went to the door in to the

corridor, then paused for effect. 'I'll never forget you people. Never in my whole
life.' He looked at Mary and smiled, and she smiled back sympathetically and
warmly. Then he turned and quickly went back towards the room containing the
colony's make-do electrical power supply junction. The door was partly open,
and he could seeHolden inside just finishing his work connecting the new switch.

'There we are,' Holden was saying to the Primitive, 'that should hold for
another few days. Put the tools away, will you? I just want to check the circuit
relay.'

The Primitive began picking up the various tools that Holden had used, he
carefully replaced each tool into its right place in a tool-box on the little work
bench. Meanwhile Holden gave his attention to a fuse-box on the far wall, so
that he had his back to the door.

Norton planned his every move before going in. From the corridor he could
see a large spanner lying on a shelf between himself and the Primitive. The
Primitive was sideways on to him at the moment, but any time now he would
have to turn his back in order to pick up one of Holden's tools. Suddenly Norton
realised how much it compared with an actor waiting to go on stage. There he
was, standing in the wings, waiting for his cue. He could see the other actors
already on stage, but he had to wait till exactly the right moment to make his
entrance. He could see his most important 'prop', the big spanner that he most
remember to pick up on entering. The only thing was an audience; but in the
circumstances that was perhaps as well.

The Primitive turned his back to pick up the last tool. Norton entered
silently, picked up the big spanner and raised it above his head, all in one
movement. Just as the spanner was arcing down onto the back of the Primitive's
head, by some telepathic means the victim sensed his danger. He ducked, and
instinctively tried to grab his spear which stood against the wall. But he was too
slow. Before his hand could reach the weapon, Norton had raised the spanner
again and brought it crashing down upon the skull of the unfortunate Primitive.

Holden whirled round. 'What the - ?' Then he saw the Primitive lying dead
on the floor. 'You must be crazy!' he yelled at Norton. 'What do you think you're
doing?'

Norton had found his audience - an audience of one startled man. Taking
his time, he put down the big spanner, then picked up the spear. It was an actor's



traditional joke that to be on stage carrying a spear means that you have only a
very small part to play in the drama. And actors never had a chance to use their
spears, not in real life.

'Put down that spear,' ordered Holden 'What you've been through - it's
affected your mind.'

Holden was standing well away, his back to the far wall.
Suddenly, Norton lunged straight at Holden with the spear, aiming for the

heart. It found its mark. Then, seizing the big spanner again, he quickly smashed
fuse-boxes, switch controls, and electrical junction-points.

Norton raced back to the dining hall. The colonists' leader, Ashe, was
talking to Mary and Jo. 'Please,' he called out to Ashe with the strained voice of
a man who had just seen murder done, 'you've got to come with me.'

'What's the matter?' Ashe asked.
'Come with me, please ,' said Norton, grabbing Ashe's arm and pulling him

towards the corridor. 'It's terrible! It's murder!'
Ashe came running after Norton towards the electrical room, the two girls

following. Norton stopped abruptly at the door to the room, covering his eyes,
waiting for Ashe to catchup with him.

'What are you talking about?' Ashe demanded. 'Look,' said Norton, and
pointed into the room.

Ashe looked, then spun round on Mary and Jo. 'No, keep back! I don't want
you to see this.' He put his arm round Norton, who was now weeping. 'What
happened?'

'I was coming by,' Norton said, between sobs. 'I saw it all... he didn't have
a chance.'

'The Primitive killed Holden?' Ashe asked.
Norton nodded. 'He went for me, too, but I grabbed a spanner and hit him.

I know it was in self-defence, but I've never killed anyone or anything in my life
before.' He continued to sob, his shoulders heaving.

'You couldn't help it,' said Ashe, as he glanced around the room. 'The relay
circuits have been wrecked.'

'Holden must have caught the Primitive messing about with the controls,'
said Norton, 'smashing things. That's why he got killed, with that awful spear.'

'Unless we get this lot repaired,' said Ashe, in his matter-of-fact way, 'the
whole colony will come to a standstill. We can't go on without electricity. 'And
Holden was the only electrician we had.' He left Norton, stepped into the room
and looked ddwn at Holden's body. 'Poor man, to die like this.'

Norton parted two of the fingers covering his eyes in order to watch Ashe
as he stood over Holden's body. He congratulated himself on a marvellous
performance.



10 The Claw

After Dent left the Doctor in the crew room, he did not again try the door,
he knew it would be locked. To bide the time the Doctor again switched on the
entertainment console. Flashing coloured lights swam onto the screen, and these
were accompanied by a low thumping sound and occasional groans. He couldn't
make out whether this was present-day symphonic or pop music, so he turned
it off. Then he sat down, and took in the detail of the room. A ship this big, he
reckoned, must have a fairly large crew, but this room had only four sleeping
bunks. Obviously these were the officers' quarters, Caldwell had thought to put
him in here so as to conceal from him the true extent of the spaceship's
complement. He wondered where the crew was housed, and how many there
really were. Then the door opened and a fresh-faced young man in IMC uniform
stepped inside.

'First Officer Morgan, sir,' he said deferentially, 'at your service. Captain
Dent asked me to drive you back to where you came from.'

The Doctor rose. 'That's very good of you. Perhaps you'd better lead the
way.'

But Morgan stood to one side of the open door. 'No, sir,' he said, 'you're
our guest. After you.'

'I suppose you're right,' said the Doctor, going into the connecting corridor.
'Just in case I take the silver.'

Morgan closed the crew room door and followed the Doctor. 'The what, sir?'
'An old fashioned joke,' said the Doctor.
'Oh, yes, sir,' said Morgan. 'Very amusing.'
The Doctor remembered his way out of the IMC spaceship. The entrance,

he noted, did not appear to be guarded. Outside was a buggy, similar to the one
Caldwell had used to bring him here.

'Is this for us?' said the Doctor.
'Yes, sir,' said Morgan. 'Please take your seat.'
The Doctor sat by the driver's seat, and then Morgan took his position.

Before starting, Morgan produced from his pocket a miniature two-way radio,
pressed the transmitting button and spoke into the built-in microphone. ' First
Officer Morgan to control. Am taking guest to his venue, starting now. '

After a moment Dent's voice replied through the two-way radio. ' Control
to First Officer Morgan. Message received and understood. Carry on. '

Morgan pocketed the little two-way radio. He turned to the Doctor, with a
friendly smile. 'I understand from Captain Dent that you've lost something and
want to look for it. With the buggy we could cover quite a distance, if you want.'

'That's very kind of you,' said the Doctor. 'Can you spare the time?'
'Strictly speaking,' said Morgan, 'each trip with the buggy has to be logged,

and accounted for. But no one's going to notice a few kilometres here or there.
Where do we start?'

The Doctor pointed. 'In that direction, I think.'
'Right,' said Morgan. He set the buggy in motion and steered the way

indicated by the Doctor. 'What is it we're looking for?'



'A rather tall, blue box,' said the Doctor.
'With no trees or anything,' said Morgan as they drove along, 'every little

thing shows up for kilometres on this planet. So it maybe it won't be too difficult
to find.'

Within fifteen minutes they were at the flat plain where the Doctor had seen
the drag marks leading from where the TARDIS had materialised. 'It was there,'
said the Doctor, pointing, 'but you can see it's been dragged towards those hills.'

'Okay,' said Morgan, starting up the buggy again. 'This looks easier riding
than those little switchback hills.' He drove ahead, following the dead straight
line of the drag marks, but not very fast. After five minutes the hills seemed to
be no nearer.

'Is this the maximum speed?' asked the Doctor.
'Well, no, sir,' said Morgan. 'But we're not in a hurry, are we?'
'Of course not,' said the Doctor.
They drove ahead for another few minutes. Then a bleeping sound came

from the pocket where Morgan had put his little two-way radio. 'Excuse me, sir,'
said Morgan, stopping the buggy and pulling out the little radio. He pressed the
transmitting button. ' First Officer Morgan responding. What is your message?
' He listened, and they heard Dent's voice.

' Your buggy monitored on radar going away from, I repeat away from,
colonist,' dome, ' Dent's voice said. 'What are you doing, First Officer Morgan? '

Morgan looked at the Doctor, smiled and shrugged. ' Just trying to help our
guest, Captain, ' he said. ' He wanted a ride. '

Dent's voice replied, ' We are not in the joyride business, Morgan. Rectify
immediately. '

' Yes, sir, ' said Morgan into the radio. 'Message understood. ' He returned
the radio to his pocket. 'I'm sorry about that, sir, but we've got to go back.'

'I understand,' said the Doctor.
Morgan steered the buggy into a wide U-turn, then slowly headed back

the way they had come. They passed the starting point of the drag marks, then
mounted the first hill which the Doctor and Jo had climbed on their arrival on
the planet, and slowly went down the other side. Morgan said, 'Doesn't this take
us near where those poor people were killed?'

'It's in a straight line from here,' said the Donor, 'just over another couple
of hills.'

Morgan said nothing as they rode over the next two hills. Then the Leeson'
dome was in the little valley before them. 'That the place?' asked Morgan. The
Doctor nodded. 'I wouldn't mind taking a look at the damage those creatures
caused,' said Morgan. 'Mind if we stop off for a minute?'

Morgan halted the buggy outside the little dome, dismounted and stood
and stared at the front of the dome. The Doctor remained seated on the buggy.
Morgan turned and asked, 'Where did they find them?'

'You can see blood stains over there,' said the Doctor, pointing. 'The woman
was found inside.'

'Is it safe to go in?' asked Morgan.
'I imagine so,' said the Doctor who, filled with suspicion, was secretly very

much on the alert, and was intrigued to see how Morgan was going to get him
to get off the buggy and go into the dome. 'Why not take a look?'



'Won't you come with me?' asked Morgan. 'I'd like to know exactly what
happened.'

The Doctor felt Morgan was just too pathetic to play with any more. He got
down from the buggy. 'Certainly I'll come with you.' He strode into the dome,
and Morgan followed. 'What is it you want to know?'

Morgan stood surveying the damage, in apparent awe. 'Where was the
woman found?'

The Doctor pointed. 'There.'
Morgan inspected the wrecked kitchen table. 'These claw mark look

fearsome.'
'Yes, indeed,' said the Doctor. 'It was all very efficiently done.'
'What do you mean?' said Morgan.
'I think the whole thing was faked,' said the Doctor, 'by someone who want

to frighten the colonists away.'
'You mean someone made these claw marks in the furniture?' asked

Morgan, still pretending not to understand.
'Yes,' said the Doctor. 'With some mechanical device.'
Morgan took from another pocket a little control unit, a replica of the one

with which Caldwell had controlled the robot. 'You mean something like this?'
he asked, and pressed one of the controls.

The robot entered through the hole in the wall, its arms extended forward
towards the Doctor. But now the metal hands had been replaced by big metal
claws. Morgan pressed another control, and the robot stopped. With his free
hand, Morgan pulled a small handgun from his trouser pocket, then backed to
the main entrance, cutting off the Doctor's escape.

'I wondered why we had all that charade about looking for my last
equipment,' said the Doctor. 'Of course your accomplices needed time to get the
robot in position behind this dome.'

'That's tight,' said Morgan. 'When Captain Dent radio'd me to say he'd
picked on up on radar, that really meant Charlie was in position far the kill.' He
paused, and licked his dry lips. 'I'm sorry about this, sir, really sorry. I hope you
realise there's nothing personal.' He pressed a button on the remote-control, and
immediately the robot's clawed arms started to flay, and then its legs began to
move it towards the Doctor.

The Doctor jumped to one side, and the robot paused, its in-built sensories
calculating where the Doctor had gone. 'It's not very quick on the turn,' remarked
the Doctor, sidestepping again.

'It's slow but sure,' said Morgan, holding his gun on the Doctor. 'It always
gets its man - or woman.'

The Doctor sidestepped again, and again the robot paused, then redirected
itself towards its quarry. Now the Doctor was close to Morgan.

'There's no escape, I'm afraid,' said Morgan. 'Might as well give in
gracefully. It'll be over in second.' The Doctor made another movewhich brought
him even closer to Morgan.

'Now keep away from the entrance,' warned Morgan, 'or I'll shoot!'
'If you shoot,' shouted the Doctor in reply, 'and my body's found with a

bullet in it, that'll mess up your story about monsters!' And having said that, he
suddenly dived for Morgan's gun, knocking it from his hand. Then he grabbed



Morgan's left band, the one holding the remote-control, and twisted it up behind
the man's back.

'You'll break my arm!' Morgan screamed.
The Doctor wheeled Morgan round, to put him between himself and the

oncoming robot. Morgan found himself looking straight into the flaying claws
of the robot, and unable to break out of the Doctor's hold.

'It'll claw me to death!'
'Drop the remote-control,' shouted the Doctor in Morgan's ear. 'Drop it!'
Morgan screamed in agony as the tip of a claw drew a stripe of blood down

one cheek. Almost involuntarily his hand released the remote-control. It fell to
the ground, and its casing split open revealing a compact bundle of now exposed
transistors and diodes. At the same time, the robot came to a complete halt; and
then, after a second, it swayed and fell over backwards with a resounding crash.

The Doctor released his grip onMorgan's arm.Morgan stood there, gasping
for breath. Than hemade a dive for the gun on the floor. But he was too exhausted
to move quickly enough, the Doctor kicked the gun away fromMorgan's groping
hand, and picked it up himself. Seeing this, Morgan turned and fled. He leapt
onto the buggy outside and drove away at top speed.

The Doctor looked at the gun in his hand, then dropped it into his coat
pocket, and sadly walked away from the dome.



11 Face-to-Face

The colonists' main dome came onto Dent's control room monitor screen in
a bird's-eye-view. Using the IMC ship's powerful rocket drive, he had lifted the
ship from its original landing place and now intended to bring it down next to
the big dome. All his technicians were in their places in the control room, and
above the low hum of the motors he could hear their chatter all around him

'... Radar probe confirms terrain firm... main retrorockets steady... descent
rate now at minimum... landing stabilisers activated and in position... final
altitude report... twenty metres, fifteen metres, ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five,
four, three, two, one... we have contact!'

Dent remained in his captain's seat while the motors slowed and finally
stopped. He intended to have a face-to-face meeting with the colonists, and to
blockbuster them off the planet. By now, if Morgan had done his job properly,
the Doctor would be a mangled corpse in the dome where the two colonists had
died. Dent had had objections from Caldwell about killing the Doctor. At one
point Caldwell seemed about to go after Morgan and the Doctor, in order to stop
the former in his work. Dent had had to remind him that if he defied his (Dent's)
ruling, he would be sacked from IMC, and put on a black list that would mean
his never working again for any other mining corporation. Caldwell would lose
his living unit on Earth, his income, and might end up sweeping the corridors
of one of Earth's great building complexes. That, finally, persuaded Caldwell to
back down.

One of the technicians said, 'All's clear, Captain. The motors are dead.
We've practically landed in the colonists' lap.'

Dent rose from his chair and put on his captain's helmet. Caldwell looked
into the control room. 'You want me to go with you?'

'No,' said Dent firmly, 'I'll handle this.'
Dent went down the connecting corridor, and then for the first time stepped

onto the terrain of the planet. The IMC ship had landed right in front of the
colonists' main dome. A group of these poorly-clothed, hungry-looking people
were standing watching from the entrance to the dome. Dent walked over to
them.

'Captain Dent,' he said. 'IMC Survey.'
A young man stepped forward. 'You've no right to be on this planet!'
An older man restrained the younger one. 'All right, Winton, let me deal

with this. My name's John Ashe. I'm the leader of this colony. We have been
established for some considerable time and - '

Dent cut in, 'Can't we talk inside your dome?'
'I'm sorry,' said Ashe, 'yes, of course. This way.'
Dent was led into the main meeting area. All the colonists gathered round

to hear the confrontation. Dent was glad to see First Officer Norton in amongst
the colonists - at least that part of the scheme seemed to have worked.

'I can assure you, Mr. Ashe,' said Dent, 'that I'm as surprised as you are.
As soon as we met your friend we realised that we must make contact with you
people immediately, to sort things out.'



'What friend?' queried Ashe.
'He said he was visiting your colony,' said Dent. 'A tall man, who calls

himself “the Doctor”. Hasn't he returned yet and told you about our meeting? He
insisted on setting off in advance of us.'

A pretty young woman spoke up from the crowd. 'Mr. Ashe, since the
Doctor hasn't returned yet, couldn't you send out a search party? Something may
have happened to him.'

'All right, Jo,' replied Ash, 'all in good time.' He turned back to Dent. 'Thus
planet has been assigned for colonisation.'

'Not according to us,' said Dent. 'We've been granted full mineral rights.
We want to move in heavy mining equipment straight away.'

Norton took his cue to speak up. 'There's plenty of other parts of the planet
you could mine! Why pick on here?'

'Our survey's been done here,' said Dent. 'We know for certain the minerals
are in this part. In any case, we've been granted mineral rights for the whole
planet.'

'I have a photostat copy of the certificate,' said Ashe, 'proving that this planet
is for colonisation only.'

'I have a copy of a certificate,' retorted Dent, 'proving the, opposite.' He
didn't really, but he knew he could produce one pretty quickly once back in the
IMC spaceship. 'There's only one solution to this,' he went on, 'we'll have to send
for an Adjudicator.' He referred to the special Earth Government officials whose
job it was to sort out claims and counter-claims.

Winton pushed his way to the front again. 'You know it can take months,
years even, for an Adjudicator's decision, and by then you'll have gutted the
planet!'

Dent ignored this. He spoke again to Ashe 'I'm sure you agree that we must
apply the proper procedures?' Ashewas clearly swayed bywhatWinton had said,
but he nodded and replied, 'Well, I suppose so.'

'Good,' said Dent. 'I'll use my ship's radio to ask Earth to send someone.'
He turned on his heel to leave, and found himself facing the Doctor who had
just entered.

'Sorry to still be alive,' said the Doctor to Dent. 'It must seriously upset your
plans.' The Doctor turned and addressed himself to the whole gathering. 'This
man tried to have me killed. They're trying to frighten you away with imaginary
monsters that don't really exist.'

By nowDent had partly recovered himself. 'That's a very serious allegation,
Doctor.'

'I know,' said the Doctor, 'and its one that I shall have pleasure in making to
the proper authorities. I imagine this Adjudicator will be very interested in your
activities, Captain Dent.'

Dent turned back to Ashe. 'When I first saw your friend I thought he was
eccentric. Now I'm convinced he's mad. I'll send a message to the Adjudicators'
Bureau immediately. Excuse me.' And with that, Dent left the dome as quickly
as possible. He had never been so humiliated in his life, and he was seething to
get his hands on First Officer Morgan.

He found Morgan in the ship's crew room, drinking astrobeer.
Overwhelmed with a rage, which he now did nothing to conceal, Dent knocked



the astrobeer can from Morgan's hand and then hit him across the face. Morgan
fell to his knees.

Dent kicked him and roared, 'Get up!'
Morgan slowly got to his feet. He touched his bruised cheek. 'You've no

right to hit a member of the staff' he cried, 'It's against the rules!'
Dent hit out again, and again Morgan fell to his knees. 'I'm doing this,' he

said, 'instead of killing you. What happened?'
This time Morgan remained where he was, crouching on the floor. 'He

smashed the robot's remote-control unit. He could have killed me!'
The door opened and Caldwell entered. When he saw Morgan grovelling

on the floor in front of Dent he grinned and said, 'So, have you got the crew
praying to you now, Captain?'

'Morgan has failed again,' said Dent, and briefly explained how the Doctor
had walked in on his meeting with the colonists.

Caldwell listened, more amused than upset. 'I'm glad I'm only the mining
engineer, and not one of you executives. Are you going to send for an
Adjudicator?'

'Of course,' said Dent. 'Legality most always be maintained.'
'Meaning,' said Caldwell , 'that IMC will bribe the Adjudicator to give the

right decision?'
'That remark,' said Dent, who had now thoroughly lost his self-possession,

'is slander! IMC always keeps to the law!' He knew this was totally untrue, but
it was what he had been taught to say. 'I should put you both on a charge of
insubordination!' The tiny two-way radio in his tunic pocket started to bleep. He
pulled it out viciously, and snapped ' Yes? into its tiny microphone.

The voice was almost inaudible. ' Captain Dent? '
' Who's speaking? ' Dent shouted at the two-way radio. He held it close to

his ear to hear the answer.
' Norton here, ' said the whisper of a voice, ' from the colonists' main dome.

Two colonists are just about to enter the ship. '
Dent's temper faded away instantly. 'What for? ' he asked excitedly.
' It's the girl called Jo and a young man called Winton, ' continued Norton's

voice. ' They're going to look for evidence against us. They want to find out
about the monsters. ' The voice paused. 'Must go now, ' Norton said. ' Someone's
coming... don't want to be caught. ' Norton went off the air.

Dent went into action. 'You two stay in here.'
'Why?' said Caldwell .
'For once obey an order without asking questions,' Dent said icily. 'And keep

the door locked from the inside.' He left them and hurried into the connecting
corridor, and thence to the control room.

A number of his technicians were there. He grabbed the microphone next
to his captain's seat. ' Now hear this, ' he said, addressing everyone on the ship.
' We have visitors. I want them to be let in - so no guards at the entrance to the
ship. Lock all doors to rooms. Leave the connecting corridors free of personnel.
Do not, I repeat do not, interfere with our guests in any way. ' He then told
the technicians in the control room to conceal themselves wherever they could
- behind chairs, under the main console, behind the door. Then he waited. Five
minutes later the door to the control room opened slowly and Jo looked inside.



'The whole ship's deserted,' she said, and came on in. Winton followed her.
'Where should we look for evidence?' Winton asked.
'I don't know,' said Jo. 'Maybe in here.'
Dent stood up fromwhere he had been crouching be-hind his captain's chair.

He held a gun in his hand. 'Is there anything I can do to help you?' he asked.



12 The Bomb

Jo turned to escape, but suddenly the control room of the IMC spaceship
was full of IMC men who had been hiding. She and Winton had walked into
a trap.

'Grab them,' ordered Dent, and the IMC men pinned the prisoners' ands
behind their backs. 'Now let me explain our mining methods,' said Dent. 'We
use a lot of explosive charges - bombs, if you like. These bombs are exploded
by remote-control radio. A charge set ten or twenty kilometres from here can be
made to explode by a touch of this button.' Dent put a finger on to a button on
the control console. He turned to Jo. 'Your friend the Doctor will be invited here.
I shall explain that if he does not retract his ridiculous story about attempted
murder, I shall press this button. I shall also explain that you and your companion
will be killed instantly if I am moved to press that button.' He then turned to his
men. 'All right, carry out the exercise.'

The IMC men set to work binding their prisoners' arms and legs, and
gagging them. Then big plastic sacks were brought in, and Jo and Winton each
put into one.

After that Jo was conscious of being carried down a corridor, into the open,
and then being driven on some vehicle for a distance over the rough terrain.
When the sacks were removed they were by the ruin of a small single-room stone
building. It had no roof or door or windows. They were still surrounded by IMC
men, who quickly removed the gags and untied their arms and legs. Then they
were frog-marched into the ruin. Two IMC men inside were gently putting a
plain metal box down in the middle of what had been the floor. A third IMCman
was using a sledge-hammer to drive into the floor a metal spike with a big ring in
it. Now an IMC man quickly put a manacle on to one of Jo's wrists, and another
manacle on to one of Winton's, then attached chains from them to a ring on the
plain metal box; and, having done that, he attached another chain from the box
to the metal spike driven into the floor. The attachment of Jo and Winton to the
metal box - obviously a bomb of some sort - and of the box to the spike in the
floor was done in under a minute, and without a word being spoken by the IMC
men. The job done, the IMCmen stepped back, and the one who seemed to be in
charge came forward and adjusted a control on the side of the box. Immediately,
a light started to flash on top of the box. Under the IMC badge on this man's tunic
as his name and rank in small letters, 'Security Guard Allen'. Winton wrenched
wildly at his manacles, tautening the chain that held him to the metal box.

'I wouldn't do that,' cautioned Allen, 'unless you want to blow yourself to
bits. In fact, I wouldn't move at all.'

'You're nothing more than criminals,' Jo shouted.
'We obey our orders,' said Allen. 'There can't be anything wrong in obeying

orders.'
With that, the IMC men hurried away. Jo looked about herself. 'What is

this place?'



'Primitive ruins; said Winton. 'They must have built these little one-room
houses at some time, but they don't now. You find these ruins all over the place.'
He stared at the manacle on his wrist. 'What do we do now?'

'Try to get away, of course,' said Jo. Jo compressed her hand, folding in the
thumb over the palm to see if she could gently pull her hand through the manacle
without upsetting the explosive charge.

The Doctor returned grim-faced from the IMC spaceship. While he had
been completing repairs to the colonists' electrical room, the message had come
fromDent saying that Jo was in the IMC spaceship and wanted to see the Doctor.
The Doctor went there immediately, only to be told by Dent that Jo was attached
to an explosive charge at a hidden location, and that she and Winton would be
killed instantly if the Doctor made any more trouble for IMC. He went straight
to Ashe and reported what Dent had said.

'This is abominable,' said Ashe. 'Even if Jo and Winton committed trespass
by entering the IMC spaceship uninvited, they should not be treated like this! I'll
go and talk to Dent straight away.'

'I don't think you have grasped the position,' said the Doctor. 'These people
have no interest in law and order, or fair play. If you go, Dent may kill his
prisoners there and then.'

'What do you suggest?' asked Ashe. He was clearly at the end of his tether,
only too willing for anyone else to take the decisions now.

'He said they were “somewhere”,' said the Doctor. 'Maybe we can find them
both.'

'I'll organise a search party immediately,' said Ashe. 'Not immediately,' the
Doctor said, restraining Ashe. 'The IMC ship is on our doorstep. They can see
everything we do. If Dent sees signs of a search, he'll press that button. We'll
have to wait until after dark. The problem is - where has he put them both with
the bomb?'

Jo sat back, her hand bruised and the manacle still on her wrist.
'Why not give up?' advised Winton. 'If you jerk that box you could blow

us sky high.'
Jo looked at the box. Its light was still flashing regularly. The thought

crossed her mind that she had no idea whether the box really contained an
explosive charge. Still, she thought it best to treat the box with great respect. One
sudden jerk on the chain connecting the box to their manacles and it might blow
up. Then she noticed the grease on the box; it ran in a long blob down one side
and might have been some kind of packing grease. She reached forward to get
same of the thick grease on to her fingers.

'Be careful!' said Winton. 'Don't touch that thing!'
'I am being careful,' she said, and rubbed the grease all over her trapped

hand. With her free hand she gripped the manacle, only to realise that the grease
on the fingers of her free hand wouldn't allow her to get a good hold on the
manacle. 'You try,' she said toWinton. 'Keep your fingers away from any grease,
get a good grip of my manacle, then pull!'

'I don't want to hurt you,' he said.
'And I don't want to freeze to death in this place tonight,' she said. 'Now

do as I ask you.'



Winton crawled over to Jo and got a firm grip on the outside of her manacle.
He pulled. Nothing happened. 'Put one foot into my armpit,' she said. 'Then you'll
have something to pull against.'

'I might pull your arm out of its socket,' he said.
'Will you please do as I ask?' Jo pleaded.
Winton worked his way round so that he could put one foot under her

armpit. Then he pulled on the manacle. Jo tried not to show the pain of having
her arm pulled, in case any reaction from her might deter Winton. Little by little
the manacle cane down over her folded hand until she could feel the bones being
crushed together. 'Keep pulling,' she said, holding back tears of pain. All at once
the manacle slid over the knuckles, and her hand was free. 'Thanks,' she said.

'You'd better run for it,' Winton said. 'Find your way back to the main dome
and tell Ashe.'

'Not without you,' she replied. 'If the grease worked for me, it can work for
you.' She reached forward to get grease to put on toWinton's still manacled hand.

'My hands are much bigger than yours,' he said, holding up the fettered
hand.

She looked. It was true. His hand could never slip through the manacle.
'Then I must break the chain,' she said and started to hunt around for a couple
of rocks of the right shape and sire.

'Far better you get on your way,' he said.
But Jo had found what she wanted. She placed one rock under the chain

to Winton's manacle, then used the other as a hammer. The chain showed no
signs of damage, so she bashed harder and harder with her make-shift 'hammer'.
Suddenly, the chain slipped off the rock the was using as an anvil. For a moment
the suddenly-taut chain pulled at the box, and the box moved slightly. They both
looked at it in horror. The light on the box started to flash at high speed, as though
it were transmitting some warning.

In the IMC ship's control room, a light on the main control console flashed
on and off at short intervals. Morgan was the first to notice it. 'Captain,' he said,
'something's happening with that explosive charge.'

Dent grabbed his console microphone. ' This is Captain Dent to Security
Guard Allen. Notify location. '

Nothing for a few moments; then Allen's voice from the loudspeaker. ' On
the way back to the ship, Captain. '

Dent said, ' Go and re-check your prisoners immediately. '
Allen's voice replied, 'Message understood. '
Jo looked with delight at the broken links of Winton's manacle chain.

Winton was already on his feet. 'Come on,' he said, 'let's go.'
They ran out of the ruined little house, then stopped. 'Which way?' said Jo.
Winton looked up at the sun. 'I reckon that way,' he said, and pointed.
They started running. As they began to climb a small hill of rock and scrub,

the IMC four-wheel buggy came over the crest of the hill. At the wheel was
Security Guard Allen. He turned the buggy to come straight at Jo and Winton.

' Split ,' said Jo, and immediately darted away from Winton, so that Allen
would not be able to catch them both.

Allen turned the buggy to head straight for Jo. She sidestepped the machine,
then fell heavily on to the rocks. Allen stopped and dismounted, and by the time



Jo was on her feet Allen had his arm round her. With his free hand he pulled his
gun. Winton had paused some little distance away, not knowing what to do.

'Keep running,' Jo shouted. 'Go and tell them where I am and what's
happened!'

Winton turned and began running away, Allen took aim with his gun and
fired. But the shot missed. In a moment Winton was over the crest of the hill.

Allen pocketed his gun, and pulled out his little two-way radio. ' Security
Guard Allen to CaptainDent, ' he said into the radio. 'Male prisoner has escaped,
but have recaptured female. '

Jo wriggled in Allen's grip, but the arm now round her waist was like a steel
vice. After a moment Dent's voice replied over the little radio. ' Captain Dent
to Security Guard Allen. Re-attach female to explosive charge, and from now
on stay where you can see her. if f intend to activate the explosive, I shall give
you ample warning. '

' What about the escaped male? ' Allen asked.
' Other guards will be sent to pursue, ' said Dent's voice, ' and he need not

be brought in alive... '
Winton stood gasping for breath at the top of another of the little hills. The

position of the sun told him which direction to go to get back to the colony. He
fingered the bullet graze that ran along one shoulder. There was some blood, but
it wasn't serious. His heart had stopped pounding now, and he started to jog-trot
down the slope. Then he saw an IMC buggy coming over the crest of another hill.
It wasn't Security Guard Allen this time, it carried four men in IMC uniforms,
and they carried long guns. They spottedWinton almost instantly, and the buggy
started to come towards him.

He stopped, and looked about him. There was no hiding-place, only open
dusty ground and the little hills. For a moment he thought of giving in to them.
He was tired and exhausted and the wound was beginning to hurt. All they'd do
was take him prisoner again. He turned back to look at the buggy, with the half-
formed idea of raising his hands in surrender. To his surprise, the buggy had
stopped. Two of the guards were aiming their long guns at him. They both fired
at the same time, and Winton heard bullets whistle past him and hit the ground
beyond. These men had no intention of taking him prisoner they were there to
hunt him down and kill him.

In panic he ran away from the buggy, then suddenly realised he was making
for a sharp incline of craggy rocks that the buggy couldn't possibly climb. Two
more bullets were fired. One hit the rock ahead of him, and the other ripped
through the trousers of his old work-denims. Now he started to dart from side to
side as he climbed the steep embankment of rocks, thus presenting the IMCmen
with a more difficult target. As he climbed higher and higher, he looked over
his shoulder to see what the IMC men were doing now. The driver had brought
the buggy to the foot of the rocky steep, and now three of the IMC men were
climbing after him.

But Winton was already well ahead now. He reached the top of the incline,
raced over its crest, and then stopped dead when he saw what lay in the valley
now below him. Next to a big plastic tent carrying the letters 'IMC' was a
mechanical robot using a drill in the ground. An IMCman emerged from the tent
and stood watching the work of the robot, but hadn't yet seen Winton. Winton



calculated that on this downward slope he might be able to flash past the tent and
the IMC man before the latter knew what had happened. Winton started running
downhill at full speed.

The three IMC security guards found the rocky slope hard going. They
weren't used to this kind of physical activity, and their uniforms restricted them.
But they pressed on as best they could because they all had IMC living units
back on Earth that they didn't want to lose, and IMC wives, and their children
were in IMC schools that were very exclusive, and if they got the duralinium
from this planet they would all get good IMC bonuses. Above all, they hated all
colonists because they were eccentric and didn't conform to the society on Earth,
and sometimes they smelt of sweat.

As the three IMCmen reached the crest of the hill they heard two shots ring
out. By the sound of the shots they knew they had come from one of the specially-
made IMC handguns. Curious, they ran over the crest of the hill until they saw
below them Caldwell 's IMC tent, the robot, and Winton's body sprawled on the
dusty hillside. Caldwell stood over the body, gun in hand. He looked up the hill.

'I got him for you,' he shouted up to them. 'Don't worry. Charlie here will
dig a grave.'

The three IMC men turned back, to go down the rocky side of the hill again
to their waiting buggy. One of them brought out his little-two-way radio and
reported the success of the mission to Captain Dent, who seemed very pleased.

Outside the IMC tent, Caldwell remained exactly where the three security
guards had seen him. When they were well out of sight he pocketed his gun and
sauntered over to where Winton was sprawled on the ground.

'It's all right,' he said, 'they've gone.'
Winton slowly got to his feet. 'Thanks.'
Caldwell had gone into the tent, and gestured for Winton to follow. Inside

there was a collapsible work table, and on its surface were various samples of
rock which the robot had drilled out of the ground. Caldwell opened a fast-aid
box, took from it some antiseptic and started to clean up Winton's shoulder
wound.

Winton said, 'Why are you helping me?'
'I'm a miner,' said Caldwell, 'not one of Dent's killers.' He took hold of a

dressing and put it onWinton's shoulder. 'Listen friend,' he said, 'go back to your
colony and persuade your friends to get off this planet.'

'We're waiting for the Adjudicator,' said Winton.
Caldwell picked up one of the rocks from the table. 'See those silver-

coloured veins in this rock? That's pure duralinium. This is the biggest strike
we've ever made. IMC want this planet, and they're going to get it.'

'But an Adjudicator's decision is law,' Winton protested. 'If he says we can
stay, then it's all right'

Caldwell stood back and grinned, but it was not a happy grin. 'I've just saved
your life, young man,' he said, 'so that gives me the right to give you a little
fatherly advice. Adjudicators can be fixed, understand?' He rubbed his fingers
against his thumb. 'Money,' he said, 'that's all that really matters, I don't like it,
and you don't like it, but that's how things work. So just you set about persuading
your good people to get off this planet before anyone else gets killed.'



13 The Attack

Ashe called together the search party of a dozen men in the main meeting-
room of the big dome. The Doctor explained to the men exactly what had
happened - how he had been called back to the IMC spaceship where Dent had
told him that Jo and Winton were chained to a bomb. When the Doctor had
finished, Ashe spoke to the men.

'There are only two things we can do,' said Ashe. 'We can let ourselves be
blackmailed by IMC, or we can go out and search for the prisoners.'

The response from the men made it quite clear that they were in no mood
to give in to IMC.

'Fine,' said Ashe. 'With the IMC spaceship sitting on our doorstep, we'll
have to wait till its dark before we leave.'

Norton spoke up. 'The prisoners could be anywhere. How do you expect to
find them after dark?'

'There aren't many places to hide,' Ashe said. He went to a wall-map and
pointed. 'There are some caves here, some Primitive ruins here and there, and
that's about all.'

'But aren't we wasting our time with this proposal,' asked Norton. He
pointed at the Doctor. 'We've only got his word about all this

'Why should I lie?' asked the Doctor.
Norton had his answer ready. 'Maybe you're really working for IMC. This

is a trick to get all the men to leave the main dome so that the IMC men can
walk in and take over!'

And at this point Winton staggered in clutching his wounded shoulder. He
slumped down onto a chair and immediately told his story about the way inwhich
he escaped from the bomb. Because of his state of exhaustion, the wall-map was
taken down and brought over to him so that he could point to the ruins where
he and Jo had been chained to the explosive charge. 'But your wasting your time
going there,' said Winton. 'My guess is they'll have moved her somewhere else
by now.'

'Why should they?' said Ashe, 'if they think you are dead?'
Winton didn't answer the logic of that. He rushed on to his next point

instead. 'I've got a better idea. We'll take over their spaceship and send them
packing!' There was a murmur of approval from the colonists. But Ashe spoke
up against the idea. 'We're not going to start a war, Winton.'

Winton looked up at Ashe. 'Look, I've been chained to a bomb, hunted, and
shot at. As far as I'm concerned, the war's already started!'

'We must wait for the Adjudicator,' said Ashe.
'Remember what that IMC miner told me - the Adjudicator will be fixed,'

said Winton. He went on, 'We'll take over their spaceship, make them release Jo,
and send them back to Earth.'

'I absolutely forbid it,' said Ashe.
Winton summoned up the strength to struggle to his feet. 'We've listened

to you for long enough, Ashe.'



'I'm the elected leader of this colony,' Ashe said. 'It says in our Constitution,
to which you agreed, that although we run the colony on democratic lines, in a
state of emergency the leader has the authority to act as he thinks best.'

'Then my best is better than your best,' retorted Winton. He turned his back
onAshe and said to the onlooking colonists, 'We'll attack in force in themorning!'

The male colonists gathered round Winton, to discuss the attack. Ashe
found himself pushed out of the way. He turned to the Doctor. 'What can I do?'

The Doctor pushed his way through the crowd of colonists to Winton. 'You
said one of the IMC men helped you. Where can he be found?'

Winton said, 'His name's Caldwell . He's got a tent pitched in the north
sector.'

The Doctor looked at the map to check what was meant by the 'north sector',
then quickly hurried out into the oncoming night.

The Doctor found Caldwell in the IMC tent. He was testing rock samples,
using an instrument about the size of a fountain-pen that bleeped furiously every
time it was pointed at a duralinium vein.

'Working out your future bonuses?' asked the Doctor from the doorway to
the tent.

Caldwell looked up, surprised. 'Sort of. What do you want?'
'Your help,' said the Doctor.
Caldwell turned back to his work. 'I'm an IMC man,' he said quietly.
'Do you know that Captain Dent has got my companion, Jo Grant, chained

to a bomb?' said the Doctor.
'That's just to scare you into keeping quiet,' said Caldwell . He went on

working, or pretending to work. To the Doctor it was obvious that Caldwell 's
conscience was bothering him.

'Tomorrowmorning,' said the Doctor, 'the colonists are going to attack your
spaceship. I believe that might provoke Captain Dent to press the button.'

Now Caldwell stopped working and looked up. 'If those idiots attack the
IMC ship,' he said, 'the guards will mow them down. You'd better stop that attack
before it happens.'

'I don't know that I can,' said the Doctor, 'although I'm going to try. But
there's something you can do.'

'What?' asked Caldwell .
'Release Jo,' said the Doctor, 'before the attack starts.'
Caldwell looked from the Doctor back to the bits of precious rock. He stared

at the rock samples for some time. Then he drew a long breath. 'Why do you
have to pick on me?' he said, still staring at the lumps of rock.

'Because,' said the Doctor, 'I believe that at heart you're really a good man.'
Caldwell continued to look at the rocks on the table top. Then, finally, he

said, 'I'll do what I can. But you'd better stop that attack, Doctor. It won't be a
battle. It'll be a slaughter.'

The Doctor left Caldwell staring at the rock samples.
An hour later saw Caldwell back in the control room of the spaceship.

Morgan had just received news on the radio that an Adjudicator was on the way
and would arrive soon. Dent was about to send another IMC guard to the
Primitive ruin to relieve Security GuardAllenwhowas still keeping an eye on Jo.



'Don't bother about relieving the guard,' Caldwell said. 'Just have the girl
brought back here.'

Captain Dent was taken aback by Caldwell 's remark. 'What do you mean?'
he asked.

'I've gone along with you in a whole lot of things,' said Caldwell . 'But
chaining a girl to a bomb, that's pretty low! I want her brought back here
immediately.'

Now Dent knew that Caldwell was serious. Had the man gone out of his
mind? 'She stays where she is,' said Dent. 'And in case you've forgotten, I'm in
command,' he added icily.

'And in case you've forgotten,' said Caldwell evenly, 'I'm yourmineralogical
expert. Either the girl's brought back, or the survey stops.'

Captain Dent had never met with insubordination like this before. He tried
to remember what he had learnt during his staff management training. '
Caldwell ,' he said, putting on smile, 'we're sitting on the biggest duralinium
strike in the history of IMC! This is no time for two old buddies to fall out about
some stupid girl!' This was from page 44 of the Corporation's staff management
handbook.

'We aren't buddies,' said Caldwell , 'and never have been. Bring the girl
back, or I'm on strike.'

To strike was expressly forbidden by the IMC Terms of Employment, but
Dent thought it best not tomention that. He tried another ploy. 'If you fall out with
IMC,' said Dent, keeping up his smile, 'you've got an awful lot to lose. Your wife
isn't going to like it if you don't have that nice IMC living unit back on Earth.'

'There's something the great IMC staff index doesn't know about me,' said
Caldwell . 'My wife walked out on me just before this trip, so you can't use that
on me any more. Bring the girl back, and you can keep my share of the bonus
if you like.'

Dent held down his rising temper, and turned to Morgan. 'Have her brought
back.'

Morgan just stared.
'Did you hear me?' Dent barked.
Morgan jumped to his feet. 'Yes sir. Right away, sir.' He hurried out of the

control room.
Dent turned back to Caldwell . 'I don't know what game you're playing,

Caldwell , but I hope you realise that you have committed professional suicide.'
Jo felt her arm being tugged. She opened her eyes, saw Security GuardAllen

looking down at her. 'Wake up,' he said. 'You're going back to the spaceship.'
She sat up stiffly, and saw that she was now manacled by both wrists to the

bomb. Its light was no longer flashing.'What's happening?' she asked.
But Allen didn't answer. He produced a key and unlocked the manacles. 'On

your feet,' he said, and took her arm and yanked her up. 'This way.' Allen turned
Jo round and started to propel her towards the door. All at once five Primitives
entered, silently coming through the door and the gaping holes that were once
windows. Allen immediately pulled out his gun. 'Get out of the way,' he said
menacingly.

Jo felt Allen's grip tighten on her arm, and knew that he was really nervous.
'Don't be frightened,' she said, 'they're harmless.'



Allen pushed Jo forward. 'Come on, let's go,' he said. But a Primitive stood
directly in front of Allen. With his gun hand, Allen tried to shove the Primitive
out of his way. Instantly, the Primitive grabbed Alien's arm, and tried to take
the gun from him. Allen fired a shot, and Jo saw a Primitive by the door fall
backwards, blood spurting from his chest. Everyone stopped moving; they all
stood motionless, staring at the dead Primitive. Then one of the Primitives
whirled round, and drove his spear into Allen's chest with a sickening thud. Allen
fell backwards with a scream, the gun falling from his hand. He writhed a little
then stopped moving.

Jo found herself unguarded, near the open doorway. All the Primitives were
looking at Allen's body. She turned and ran. Outside the door strong arms caught
her. Held fast, she looked up into the impassive face of yet another Primitive.

It was dawn. Winton and all the male colonists were gathered round the
map. He had drawn an X to show the position of the IMC spaceship in relation
to the main dame. Ashe stood forlornly in the background. The Doctor was in
heated argument with Winton.

'I tell you again,' said the Doctor, 'a frontal attack would be sheer suicide!'
'We've got them outnumbered,' replied Winton.
'Do you think that means anything?' said the Doctor. 'The ship's like a

fortress.'
One of the colonists, a big man called Smedley, spoke up. 'Who's side are

you really on, Doctor? If you don't want to carry a gun with us, then clear off!'
'I don't intend to carry a gun with anyone,' said the Doctor. 'All I'm

suggesting is that we don't offer ourselves up to the IMC guns to get killed.'
Another colonist spoke up. 'The difference between you and us,' he told the

Doctor, 'is that we saved and scrimped to get here, and we've worked with our
hands to try to survive here! We're willing to die for our colony and you're not!'
This outburst got a lot of approval from all the other colonists.

The Doctor waited till they'd quietened down. 'Back in the days when Earth
had wars,' he said, 'there was a famous soldier called General Patton who told his
men, “I don't want you to die for your country - I want you to make the enemy
die for his country”, or words to that effect. If you all get killed, as you certainly
may, nothing will have been achieved.'

'All right, then,' said Winton. 'Have you got any better ideas?'
'Possibly,' said the Doctor. 'But since I suspect that there is at least one spy

amongst as, I'd rather not disclose it at a public meeting.'
As the sun rose up gradually from the eastern horizon, Mary Ashe left the

main dame and walked straight towards the IMC spaceship. She carried an one
arm a small handmade basket containing a few items of food. There were now
two uniformed IMC guards standing at the entrance to the spaceship. They
watched her, curiously, as she walked straight towards them. As it became clear
she was going to try to enter the spaceship, the guards closed in on her.

'Where do you think you're going?' one of them asked.
'I believe you've got a friend of mine here,' said Mary. 'I'm bringing her

some food.'
'There are no friends of yours in this spaceship,' said the other guard, amused

by his own joke.



The first guard laughed, too. Then his mouth fell open, and his body
crumpled, as the Doctor, who had hidden behind the spaceship, applied a
Venusian karate hold to the back of the man's neck. Winton, who had also been
in hiding, simply hit the back of the other guard's head with a rock. Very quickly
the two unconscious guards were dragged away.

Caldwell meanwhile had slept fitfully. As soon as he woke, he rolled out
of his crew room bunk, pulled on his IMC uniform, and went up for'ard to the
control room. Morgan and Dent were already there. 'Where's the girl?' Caldwell
enquired.

Dent looked up. 'You heardme give the order last night for her to be brought
here.'

Dent turned to Morgan. 'Where is she?'
'I don't know, sir,' said Morgan. 'I passed the order an to Security Guard

Allen.'
Caldwell started to say, 'If you two are playing games - ' but Dent cut in,

'I don't play games, Caldwell !' He turned back to Morgan. 'Find out what's
happened, and be quick about it!'

Morgan reached for the console microphone, switched on and sent out a
call to Security Guard Allen. After five repeated calls he turned back to Dent.
'His receiver's turned on and working, but he isn't answering.'

'Get over there,' said Dent. As Morgan scuttled out of the control room,
Dent turned to Caldwell , 'If anything's happened to one of my security guards,
you are to blame.'

Morgan went down the connecting corridor at a run. Coming from the other
direction were two men in IMC uniforms. 'Hey, you two,' he said, 'I want you
to come with me - ' And then he found himself staring into the gun drawn by
the younger of the two men.

'Sorry to deceive you,' said the Doctor. 'Now turn round and go back to the
control room.'

As Morgan turned, Winton thrust the gun in his back. Then Morgan heard
Winton emit a quiet whistle; there was a rush of muffled footsteps as colonists
swarmed through the ship's entrance and along the connecting corridors. Morgan
was pushed forward to the control room. The Doctor went ahead and kicked
open its door.

Winton pushed Morgan inside. Dent and Caldwell looked up, alarmed;
meanwhile sounds of a gun battle between the colonists and IMC guards broke
throughout the rest of the ship.

'Where's Jo Grant?' said the Doctor.
Winton was now covering the three IMC officers with the handgun he had

taken from one of the overpowered guards. Dent kept his hands well in sight. for
fear of bring killed if Winton suspected he was reaching for his gun.

'She seems to have vanished,' saidDent, keeping very cool. This was exactly
the sort of situation for which he'd been trained to well. 'I can't contact her guard.
As a matter of fact, I was getting rather worried myself.'

The Doctor turned to Caldwell . 'Is he telling the truth?'
Caldwell nodded. 'I think so.'



The sound of gunfire had stopped, and the colonist Smedley came into the
control room, his huge frame filling the doorway. 'Everything's under control,'
he reported.

'Good,' said the Doctor. 'Winton, they're your prisoners now. I'm going to
find Jo. Excuse me.' The Doctor hurried out.

Dent said, 'You realise this is an act of piracy, punish-able by death under
Earth's laws?'

'We're not on Earth,' repliedWinton. He turned to Smedley, 'Get their guns.'
'It's a pleasure,', said Smedley, and started collecting the handguns from the

three IMC officers.
Using a captured IMC buggy, the Doctor - now back in his own clothes -

and Ashe were at the Primitive ruin in a few minutes. Security Guard Allen's
body lay where it had fallen. The Doctor inspected the spear in the chest. 'It
seems that the Primitives are no longer friendly,' he concluded.

Ashe was looking at the large amount of dried blood near the doorway. 'It
was probably in instant retaliation.' he said. 'He shot a Primitive, and then the
others turned on him.'

'Where would they have taken Jo?' asked the Doctor.
'In the early days,' said Ashe, 'two of our people said they found

underground ruins in some caves. Primitives lived there, and our people got the
impression that the Primitives were guarding some other sort of creature that
lived down there as well. They set out again, with guns, to see what it was all
about.'

'What did they find?' said the Doctor.
'We'll never know,' said Ashc. 'Neither of them ever came back.'
Ashe was about to say something else, but his voice was suddenly drowned

by the thunderclap roar of a spaceship in flight. Instinctively, they both looked
up. Racing across the morning sky was a spaceship similar to the IMC one but
much smaller. It was coloured a brilliant scarlet.

'The Adjudicator,' said Ashe. 'That's the Earth Government colour - scarlet.'



14 The Adjudicator

Captain Dent was tied hand and foot to his captain's chair. Morgan and
Caldwell were tied to their lees comfortable ones. The control room was filled
with colonists, and the sweaty smell of their bodies was heavy in the air that
Dent had to breathe.

'You're only making things worse for yourselves,' said Dent.
Winton was busy trying to prise open a locker using a jemmy. 'You think

so?'
'You heard the ship land,' Dent said. 'What sort of impression will this make

on the Adjudicator?'
The colonists laughed. Winton finally broke open the locker and looked

inside. 'Now what have we here?' The colonists pressed forward to see. Winton
lifted out a film projector. 'What's this?' he asked Dent.

Dent thought quickly. 'Part of our survey equipment.' But Winton found the
right button to press. The projector came to life and put a picture on the wall of
a giant lizard. In fact, it was a very small lizard which had been filmed in close-
up. 'Just as the Doctor thought; said Winton, 'an optical illusion.'

Smedley looked into the locker again and brought out a big metal claw.
'This is no optical illusion,' he said. 'This is what you killed the Leeson with. It's
the evidence we need. You're murderers, and as of now the punishment on our
planet is going to be death by hanging!'

All the colonists seemed to agree with this. ThenMorgan spoke up. 'Captain
Dent's the killer,' he said. 'He's killed colonists on other planets, too.'

Dent thought quickly. Morgan might make mistakes, but he would never
act the traitor. So Dent responded, 'Shut up, Morgan!' and tried to make it sound
convincing.

Winton asked Morgan, 'You want to confess?'
'I only carried out orders,' saidMorgan, which wasmore or less true. 'I could

show you more evidence if you want to see it.'
'Don't trust him,' said Smedley.
But Winton asked, 'Where is this evidence?'
'In one of the lockers here,' said Morgan. 'Untie me and I'll get it for you.

You can keep a gun on me all the time.'
'You show them anything,' Dent shouted at Morgan, 'and you're finished

with IMC! Understand that? You'll lose your living quarters, your wife will turn
on you, your children will disown you - ' One of the colonists hit Dent in the face.

Winton aimed his gun at Morgan. 'Untie him,' he told the colonists. Two
of them quickly stepped forward and cut the ropes holding Morgan to his chair.
He rose, and went to the most secret locker in the control room, unlocked it and
put his hand inside. Now Dent had to get Winton's attention, even at the risk of
another blow to the face.

'You listen to me,' Dent pleaded. 'I'm still your captain - '
Winton wheeled round, his gun pointed now at Dent. 'You're nothing!' he

shouted. 'Keep quiet!'



And this gave Morgan the opportunity he needed. His hand came out of the
locker holding a rocket pistol, which he pointed at the back of Winton's head.
'Drop that gun,' he said, 'or you're dead!'

To Dent it seemed a lifetime as Winton stood with his gun aimed at him,
whilst Morgan stood with the rocket pistol touchingWinton's head. In fact it was
only three seconds before Winton realised that the colonists' victory was over,
and he dropped the gun. Morgan moved Winton round, so that Winton acted as
a shield against any sudden counter-attack. 'All of you,' said Morgan, 'drop your
guns, or I kill this man instantly.' One by one the colonists dropped their guns
to the floor. 'Now you,' he said to the colonist who had hit Dent, 'untie Captain
Dent. And you,' he said to Smedley, 'untie Mr. Caldwell.'

As soon as Dent was free he picked up a gun and levelled it at the man
who had hit him. 'I should blow your head off,' he said, 'but perhaps I'll save
that till later.'

Then they all heard Mary Ashe's voice from the radio loudspeaker. ' Main
dome calling IMC ship, ' she said. ' The Adjudicator is ready for the tribunal.
Kindly advise me the situation there. '

Dent grabbed site microphone. ' The situation, ' he said, ' is that we are all,
I repeat, all coming over there to state our case. '

' Who is that speaking? ' Mary asked, surprised to hear Dent. But Dent did
not reply.

John Ashe had arranged benches along either side of the colonists' meeting-
room in the dome, and one big chair at one end for the Adjudicator. The
Adjudicator was already sitting there, smart in his black tunic and trousers, a
small dark beard accentuating the thrust of his chin, and compelling brown eyes
which darted from one to another of the colonists and IMC men as they trooped
in. The colonists sat one side of the room, the IMC men sat facing them. All
the colonists were unarmed; all the IMC carried holstered handguns. Captain
Dent walked up to the Adjudicator, hand outstretched, 'Captain Dent, sir, at your
service.'

The Adjudicator looked at Dent, but did not shake his hand. 'Please take
your place,' he said.

The affront angered Dent, but he tried to cover up. 'Certainly, sir. But I
thought you might first wish to see my credentials as Captain of this IMC survey
team.' He produced from his pocket his plastic identity card which carried a
colour photograph of himself.

The Adjudicator waved the card aside. 'I am here to settle a dispute, not to
check your identity.'

'As you wish, sir,' said Dent, acutely embarrassed that these affronts had
been before both the colonists and his own IMC men. 'But may I ask to see your
identification, sir?' At last he felt that he had the Adjudicator's full attention.

'My identification?'
'Simply a formality, sir,' said Dent. 'We're on a strange planet, we've never

met before... it seems a reasonable request.'
'I am the Adjudicator,' said the Adjudicator severely, 'for this section of the

galaxy. Now kindly be seated.' Dent turned and sat next to Morgan. He touched
the younger mans arm , 'Good work, Morgan. I'll see IMC know how you acted



today.' Morgan smiled, but nudgedDent to pay attention to the Adjudicator. Dent
tumed to see the Adjudicator rising to his feet.

'I understand you two groups of people are in dispute,' said the Adjudicator.
'By the powers vested in me by the Earth Government, I shall endeavour to reach
a just decision. I shall first hear from the plaintiffs, who are the colonists.'
Suddenly he smiled. 'May I suggest that for all our sakes, brevity should be the
key-note? Now then, Mr. John Ashe.'

Ashe was not brief. He described every detail of the events which had led up
to this tribunal. Dent was pleased to see that the Adjudicator was clearly bored
with Ashe's digressions and general wordiness. Finally, much to everyone's
relief, Ashe sat down.

The Adjudicator said, 'Is there any proof of these terrible accusations?'
Winton jumped up , ' We found it in their spaceship - the metal claw they

used to kill the Leesons, and a projector - '
The Adjudicator cut in, 'Can you produce this evidence now?'
'They've destroyed it,' said Winton.
The Adjudicator pulled on his little beard. 'Then it's very difficult for me

to believe that these things ever existed.' Before the colonists could protest,
however, the Adjudicator turned to Dent. 'I will now hear the case for IMC,
Captain Dent'

Dent stood up. 'Believing this planet to be assigned for mining,' he said,
trying to be as brief as possible in order to please the Adjudicator, 'we landed
on it. When we found unlawful colonists, we sought your help. Meanwhile, the
colonists attacked as, and for a short time held as prisoner in our own ship. Thus
they have put themselves outside the law. I submit that these people be ordered
to leave this planet immediately.' He sat down.

The Adjudicator beamed with pleasure. Clearly Dent's presentation of his
case had gone down welL 'Is that all you have to say, Captain Dent?'

'Yes, sir,' said Dent. 'Except that this planet is rich minerals which could
make homes for millions of people on Earth.'

Ashe jumped up. 'That is an irrelevant argument! The only question at issue
is our legal position, not who needs-what minerals!'

'Really?' said the Adjudicator. 'Do the needs of people on Earth mean
nothing to you, Mr. Ashe?'

Ashe was flustered. 'Yes, I mean, no - well, what I mean is, sir, it's not what
we're discussing.'

'Thank you,' said the Adjudicator, 'I do like to be told what I am allowed to
discuss! Now kindly sit downy Mr. Ashe.'

Ashe sat down, his face red with embarrassment.
'I have heard the statements from both sides,' said the Adjudicator. 'On my

way here I contacted Earth and had a check made on planetary records.
Undoubtedly, an error has occurred. A faulty computer on Earth has assigned
this planet both for colonists and for mining. So it is left entirely to me to decide.
However, this is a weighty decision, one that I shall need to consider. This
tribunal stands temporarily adjourned.' He stood up. 'It customary to remain
seated until I depart. I shall return now to my spaceship, and shall re-convene
this tribunal in due course.'



But Ashe was on his feet. 'Sir, I implore you! The lives of all my friends
depend on your decision! Can't you tell us right away?'

'Kindly he seated,' snapped the Adjudicator. Then he strode out of the dome.
Everybody got up now, and in the general jumble of colonists and IMC

men, Dent found himself facing Ashe. Ashe looked bewildered, on the verge
of tears. As though forgetting that Dent was his enemy, Ashe said, 'I think that
Adjudicator's got some strange streak of cruelty in him, to keep us on tenterhooks
like this.'

Dent did not reply because he never spoke to colonists unless it was
necessary. But he agreed with what Ashe had said. There was something very
strange about this Adjudicator.



15 Primitive City

It was not difficult for the Doctor to follow the tracks made by the six-
toed Primitives and their prisoner, Jo. The tracks led fairly directly from the ruin
where he had left John Ashe, and the outcrop of rocky hills on the other side
of the section of flat desert. The foot tracks eventually converged with the drag
marks of the TARDIS, the combination of the two brought the Doctor to what
appeared to be a solid rock face. He concluded that there must be some kind of
door in this rock face, and started to look for it.

Gtom the distance he heard the pounding of running feet. He turned to see
a group of Primitives racing toward, him across the desert, spears raised. There
was nowhere to hide, and these strange half-men could out-run even the Doctor.
Hewaited, with his back to the cliff face Then the Primitives were all around him.

'I have come here to take back the girl,' he said. 'You may not understand
my words, but I know you can read my mind. I am willing to buy the girl back
with exciting and interesting bits of machinery. Then also a tall blue box which
happens to belong to me...' But he was interrupted by one of the Primitives
suddenly going up to the rock face and nodding his head towards it. To the
Doctor's astonishment, a concealed door in the rock opened. 'How very kind of
you,' said the Doctor as he was thrust inside, then partly dragged, partly pushed,
down a long corridor with rock walls. Some distance along the corridor there
was an opening in one of the walls. As the Doctor went by he glanced through
the opening and for a moment caught a glimpse of a vista of strange machinery,
silent and unattended. The Doctor wanted to stop, but the Primitives pushed him
forward. Presently the corridor ended with a T-junction. The Primitives turned
to the right, dragging and pushing the Doctor with them. From this point on,
the Doctor found himself being taken through a maze of turns and forks, and he
desperately tried to commit the route to memory. Finally, they arrived at a door
set in the rock, a door with a heavy metal bolt. One of the Primitives pulled aside
the bolt, and the Doctor was thrust into a room cut in the rock. Jo was standing
there.

'Doctor!' She rushed forward and flung her arms around him.
'Now just a minute, Jo,' he said, 'I want to try to talk, or at least think, to

these fellows.' The Doctor turned but the door had already been slammed shut.
'I can't say much for their hospitality,' he muttered.

'They've probably gone to get the other one,' Jo said. 'What other one?' asked
the Doctor.

There's a sort of creature,' she said, 'that seems to be in charge of them.'
'Humanoid?' asked the Doctor.
'No.' she said, 'not really. At least, it's got a horrible face, like an animal.'
'It might have a horrible face to you,' said the Doctor, 'but to itself it might

be rather good-looking.'
'You haven't seen it,' she said. 'Anyway, how do we get out of here?'
'No worry about that,' said the Doctor. 'I'm here to buy you back. Just a

simple business transaction. Ashe says it's happened before.' He started to look
round the room. At one end there was a machine, rather like a clock with all its



parts showing. The Doctor examined it, and realised that, whatever its purpose,
it hadn't actually worked for centuries. 'This room, and this machinery,' he said,
'must have been part of a highly-advanced civilisation, once.'

Jo said, 'Then what's happened to it?'
'Somehow it must have gone into decline,' conjectured the Doctor. 'Those

people we call the Primitives may be the descendants of a tremendously
advanced race.'

'I've been looking at this over here,' Jo said, leading the Doctor to the other
side of the room. 'Look.' Jo pointed to a series of pictures that ran along all of one
wall, and the Doctor inspected them with mounting interest. The pictures were
very old and badly faded, but it was possible to see that each depicted something
about the life of human-type people in a well-ordered community. 'Look at this
first one,' said the Doctor with excitement, 'men dragging a heavy piece of stone.
Yet here,' he said, pointing to the next picture, 'are men dragging a wheeled
vehicle with a heavy weight on it.'

'They'd invented the wheel,' said Jo.
'And here,' said the Doctor, moving along the series of pictures, 'is more

complicated machinery - the water-pump, the steam engine, and now machines
that can fly in the air.'

'That's progress,' said Jo. 'Do you notice one thing? - three different types
of people.'

'Yes, I'd noticed that,' said the Doctor. 'The three seem to start here,' he said,
pointing to a picture that seemed to indicate the discovery of electronic science.
'In the beginning all men were equal, but now we have lots of people drawn like
match-stick men, and they're probable workers lightly dressed or with no clothes
at all; then these figures in robes..

'The creature with the horrible face had a long robe,' Jo cut in.
'They may be some kind of priest,' said the Doctor. 'And now one or two

very tiny figures.'
'Like babies,' said Jo.
'Or dolls,' said the Doctor. 'Ashe told me how a Primitive became very

excited when Mary Ashe happened to produce a doll.'
'What's happening here?' said Jo, pointing to a picture a long way along the

series. It showed buildings in ruins, and the match-stick figures lying on top of
one another in a heap.

'Some terrible catastrophe,' said the Doctor. 'Notice how the artist's style is
cruder here, more primitive. Look at this one.' It was the last picture in the frieze.
Priest-like figures were pushing a doll figure through a door, beyond which were
flames.'

'A sacrifice,' said Jo.
The Doctor nodded. 'To some machine which had a furnace.' He heard the

bolt in the door outside being drawn back, and turned round. The door opened
slowly. A creature with a human body and a hairy otter-like face entered. It was
dressed in long robes. Immediately behind it came six Primitives, all with spears.
Jo moved over to the Doctor and clung to his arm. 'How do you do?' said the
Doctor. 'I'm here to take back this young. lady. In return I shall give you
interesting bits of machinery...'



The otter-like face peered round the room, blindly. Then it gestured to the
Primitives. Four of the Primitives dropped their spears and came forward to grab
the Doctor and Jo.

'I come here in peace,' said the Doctor. 'I mean you no harm!'
Already his arms were pinioned behind his hack by a hugely powerful

Primitive. The robed creature gestured again, and Jo and the Doctor were hustled
out of the room and down what seemed endless corridors cut in the rock. They
arrived at enormous double-doors guarded by more Primitives. These were
opened and Jo and the Doctor were pushed into a large room. This was different
from any other part of the underground city. Instead of rough-rock walls, the
sides were made of smooth, silvery-coloured metal. In the centre was a large
round object like a drum made of the same silvery metal. On its top were press-
button controls.

It's very kind of you to show us all this,' said the Doctor, as though he had
entered the room voluntarily. 'What's that?' Since his arms were still firmly held
behind his back, he could only indicate the drum object by nodding his head.
Neither the Primitives nor the robed creature took any notice of the Doctor's
remarks. They pushed him to the far end of the room where a large hatch was
let into the wall. The robed creature looked' at the hatch with its near-sightless
eyes, then gestured again. The Primitive who had been on guard outside sprang
forward and opened the hatch. Intense heat filled the room. Inside the hatch was
a white-hot electronic furnace.

'They're going to sacrifice us!' Jo screamed.
As the Doctor struggled wildly to free himself, four Primitives dragged Jo

towards the hatch. Her screams filled the room, echoing from the metal walls,
as they picked her up bodily to throw her into the furnace. Then, suddenly, a
small doll-like creature seemed to swim up from the flames, its tiny white hand
raised. The Primitives dropped Jo and backed away in terror. The robed creature
looked about blindly, not knowing what had happened. The Doctor found his
arms released, and the Primitives who had held him began backing away from
the creature that had materialised from the furnace.

'I am the Guardian,' said the little doll figure that seemed to float is the
flames. 'Why have you entered this place?'

'I was brought here,' answered Jo.
'And I came to take her back,' said the Doctor. 'May I ask what it is that

you guard?'
The Guardian ignored the Doctor's question. 'All intruders in this city must

die. That is the law.'
'The race who built this city.' said the Doctor urgently, 'were intelligent and

civilised. Their laws would not condemn the innocent.'
'The law must be obeyed,' said the Guardian.
'Surely all true laws must be based on justice?' the Doctor argued. 'We are

strangers to this planet. All we ask is to be allowed to go.'
The Guardian seemed to consider this point. Then it spoke again, 'You are

of superior intelligence, so you may go free.'
Jo hugged the Doctor. 'Thanks,' she said to the Guardian.
'But you,' the Guardian said to Jo, 'are of no value. I shall give you to the

servants for a sacrifice. It amuses them.'



'I refuse to leave without her,' said the Doctor. 'I am responsible for her
safety.'

'And I,' said the Guardian, 'am responsible safety of that which I guard.'
'Does the amusement of your servants warrant the death of an intelligent

being?' said the Doctor.
Again the Guardian seemed to weigh up the Doctor's words before

answering. 'I was sacrificed, and I still live.'
'Not all are like you,' said the Doctor, 'so that is no argument.'
'I appreciate logic,' said the Guardian. 'Is this creature you protect of some

value?'
'She is life,' said the Doctor. 'That which is living is always of value. It

cannot be replaced.'
'Therefore,' said the Guardian, who seemed to be enjoying this debate, 'do

you not eat?'
'I regret, sir,' said the Doctor, 'I do not understand your question.'
'If you eat flesh then the life of that flesh ceases to exist,' said the Guardian.
Jo clung to the Doctor's arm. 'Tell him we'll be vegetarians from now on.'
'I understand your remark,' said the Guardian. 'But if one eats vegetation,

that too dies. What is your answer to that?'
Jo whispered desperately to the Doctor. 'Doctor, just plead for my life! I

have a right to live!'
'It's no good,' whispered the Doctor. 'The Guardian only understands logic.

Leave this to me.' He turned back to the little doll creature that floated in the
white hot flames. 'I concede your point, Guardian. All nature kills to eat, but that
is for the purpose of continuing life in another form. To throw this girl into those
flames would be to extinguish life totally.'

The Guardian thought for a full minute before replying. 'You make good
argument. Both of you may now leave. You will not be harmed.' Slowly the
Guardian faded back into the flames.

Within an hour the Doctor and Jo had safely emerged from the Primitive
City and driven across the flat desert back to the colonists' dome. The Doctor
first knew things had changed when an armed IMC guard stepped forward from
the entrance to the dome and said, 'That buggy is IMC property.' The Doctor
gladly dismounted from the vehicle. 'I had every intention to return it,' he said.

'The tribunal's re-convened,' said the guard. 'Why not go in and hear what
the Adjudicator's decided?' He pointed his gun menacingly at the Doctor.

'I take it,' said the Doctor, 'that you've all got your guns back?'
'You take it right,' said the guard, and pushed the Doctor with the nozzle

of his gun.
The Doctor said, 'This way, Jo,' and led her by the hand into the main

meeting room. All the colonists sat on one side, the IMCmen on the other. As the
Doctor entered he stopped and stared at the man seated on the large chair at the
end of the room. All eyes were on the man as he spoke, 'During the adjournment
I have considered the evidence very carefully. While I have sympathy with the
colonists, there is no proof at all that their colony is successful. Crops refuse to
grow, and animal life is hostile...'

Winton jumped up. 'That was all faked by the IMC men!'



The man in the big chair ignored the interruption and continued, 'What's
more, the colonists have behaved badly by attacking the IMC spaceship. They
have made allegations which they cannot prove. In view of this, and the fact that
this planet has a mineral needed by Earth, I rule that this planet is unsuitable for
colonisation. The colonists most leave at the earliest possible time. Kindly all
remain seated while I exit.'

In the stunned silence which followed, the man rose from the big chair and
walked towards where the Doctor and Jo were standing by the entrance. He
beamed at the Doctor, but knew better than to offer his hand.

'How interesting to see you here, Doctor,' he said
'And what,' asked the Doctor, 'are you, the Master, doing on this planet?'
The Master dropped his voice. ' “Adjudicator”, if you don't mind,' he said.

'Now, if you'll excuse me, it is my duty as the Adjudicator to have a private word
with the losing side and explain how they can appeal.'

'Your duty.' said the Doctor, hardly believing his ears.
'Of course,' said the Master. 'A question of justice and fairness.' He turned

to John Ashe. 'Mr. Ashe, are you ready for a private talk with me?'
The Master turned on his heel and went off towards Ashe's private quarters.

Ashe rose from the bench he shared with the other colonists and slowly followed.
Then the IMCmen rose and trooped out of the dome. Winton jumped to his feet.
'That Adjudicator was bribed by IMC,' he said loudly. The colonists gathered
round him to listen. 'We've given up our homes and secure jobs on Earth to find
a better life on this planet. Are you going to let some crooked Adjudicator rob
you of all that?'

'I understand,' said the Doctor, 'that there is the possibility of an appeal.
Won't you let your leader try to use legal methods?'

'The law is the law of Earth Government,' shouted Winton. 'I vote we break
with Earth altogether, and declare ourselves an independent democratic
republic!'

There was amurmur of strong approval from the crowd of colonists. The big
man, Smedley, stepped into the middle of the circle next to Winton, 'He's right.
Those of you willing to carry arms against IMC and Earth, follow me and be
counted!' He walked to the end of the room, and immediately Winton followed.
'Well,' called Winton, 'who's for freedom?'

The colonists looked at one another uncertainly.WhatWinton and Smedley
proposed was treason against Earth Government. Then one man left the main
body of the colonists and went to join Winton and Smedley. 'You're right,' the
man said, 'we've had enough. I'll fight.'

Jo appealed to the Doctor. 'Youmost stop them, Doctor. They'll be outlaws.'
'I know,' said the Doctor. 'But how can I say anything when I really agree

with them?'
Now two more men stepped forward to join those standing at the far end of

the room. 'What about some of you women?' Winton called; and first two, then
three, then five women joined Winton and Smedley and the others. 'And you
men,' shouted Smedley, 'are you still undecided?' All the remaining men moved
up to the end of the room, followed by all the women except Mary Ashe. She
now stood alone where the group had been.

'Mary,' said Winton, 'which side are you on? IMC's or ours?'



'My father will try to get us justice,' she said.
'The only justice we'll get,' said Smedley, 'is with guns!'
Mary suddenly burst into tears and ran down one of the corridors so that the

others would not see her cry. The colonists formed a close circle round Winton
and Smedley and started to discuss their next move against IMC.

'There'll be more killing,' said Jo.
'Of course,' said the Doctor, 'but the situation is out of our hands now. Our

real problem is the Master. He's come to this planet for some reason, and I've
got to find out what it is.'



16 The Ambush

Captain Dent opened the locker in his control room that contained the
officers' supply of astrobeer and synthetic champagne. He was happy to be back
in the IMC ship, where he felt secure from the wide open spaces of this miserable
planet. 'Tell the crew it's stand-easy,' he said to Morgan, 'and they can all have
an issue of champagne, too.' He opened a can of champagne and offered it to
Caldwell .

'Some other time,' said Caldwell .
'Take it,' said Dent. To him the can of champagne was a peace offering, to

show Caldwell he was willing to forget their past disagreements. 'We're friends,
aren't we?'

his, as Dent knew it would, appealed to Caldwell 's basic good nature. He
took the can, but he didn't drink straight away. 'Thanks.'

Dent got out cans for himself and Morgan. 'Maybe we did have to play it
rough,' he said to Caldwell . 'But the trouble's over now. Those colonists will
find another planet, perhaps better than this one.'

The radio loudspeaker crackled. ' This is the Adjudicator, ' said a almost
inaudible voice. ' I have received an emergency call and must leave this planet
immediately. I wish to meet Captain Dent and his officers in the colonists' dome
straight away. The settlement must be ratified in the presence of all parties. '
The transmission ended.

Dent looked at Morgan and Caldwell. 'Hold the champagne till later,' he
said. 'Let's go.' He pulled on his gun-belt and led the way.

A hundred yards away, in the colonists' dome, Smedley asked Winton, 'Do
you think you fooled them?' Winton put down the radio-microphone. 'We'll soon
know.' He looked at the armed colonists surrounding him. 'Get in your positions.
And shoot to kill!'

Down a corridor within the dome, the Doctor and Jo were listening, ears
pressed to the thin partition wall, to a conversation between Ashe and theMaster.

'Believe me, my dear Ashe,' said the Master, 'I sympathise with your
position. But I have no choice. However, you have a right to appeal.'

'On what grounds?' said Ashe.
For a moment the Doctor and Jo heard nothing. Then it was the Master's

voice again, after a long and effective pause. 'If this planet had some historical
interest, for instance.'

Ashe said, 'There was once a great civilisation here, so I believe.'
'Indeed?' said the Master. 'Any traces left?'
'There's a ruined underground city not far from here,' said Ashe.
There was a sudden urgency in theMaster's voice. 'Could you lead me to it?'
'It's dangerous,' said Ashe. 'The Primitives don't like people going there.'
'Do you know why?' asked the Master.
'I think there's something of great importance to them there,' said Ashe.
'I imagine there is,' said thr,Master. 'Indeed, the sooner I get there the better.'
Elsewhere in the dome, concealed behind a packing-case, Norton pulled his

tiny two-way radio from his pocket and desperately tried to contact the IMC ship



to warn them. But themessagewas never sent. Smedley, whowas deployingmen
for the ambush, came upon Norton with the two-way radio in his hand. 'Norton,'
said Smedley, not yet having seen the radio, 'I want you and two other fellows
to hide...' Then he saw the radio. 'That's an IMC transmitter,' he shouted. Norton
knew this could never be explained away. He tried to dive between Smedley's
legs to escape. Smedley's great hands came down on Norton's neck and broke
it. Norton's body fell limp to the ground. Smedley stamped on the little two-way
radio until all its parts were spewed out on the floor; then he went on with his
work of organising the ambush.

Five minutes later the IMC officers, followed by their guards, strode into
the dome. No one was to be seen. 'Adjudicator!' called Captain Dent, 'you wanted
us back here to ratify the settlement.' By now all the IMC guards had crowded
in behind Dent and Morgan, forming a neat target for the guns of the hidden
colonists. At a shout from Winton, armed colonists appeared from behind the
agricultural machinery, the packing-cases, the door leading to the radio room,
from over the railings of the steps that led to upstairs quarters. Three IMC guards
died instantly in the initial hail of bullets; the others, with Dent and Morgan,
dived for protective positions and returned the fire.

The Doctor and Jo rushed along the corridor from Ashes private quarters to
the scene of the battle, the Doctor hoping he might be able to call for a cease-fire
to stop the bloodshed. The Master, who had also heard the shooting, hurriedly
left John Ashe, it would upset all his plans if the colonists' revolt was successful.

Keeping Jo well back, the Doctor stood in a doorway that led on to the scene
of the battle. 'For the sake of reason,' he called, 'stop shooting!' And then he felt
a gun rammed into the back of his own neck.

'Sorry, Doctor,' said the Master, 'but an opportunity such as this cannot be
missed.' He moved round the Doctor, still holding his small handgun aimed at
the Doctor's head. 'I'd rather be watching your face as I pull the trigger,' he said.

'You'd kill me in cold blood?'
'On the contrary,' replied the Master, 'you are going to die in the heat of

battle. A stray bullet, from an IMC or a colonist's gun - no one will ever really
know. Goodbye, Doctor.'

The Master raised the gun and started to squeeze the trigger. John Ashe
came running down the corridor. 'Adjudicator,' he shouted, 'we've got to stop
this! My people are making themselves into outlaws!'

'Exactly what I was saying to the Doctor,' said theMaster, lowering the gun.
He could hardly murder the Doctor in front of Ashe. 'Perhaps you'd like to tell
them to stop.'

Both the Master and the Doctor took cover as an IMC man ran to the
doorway for cover, and was cut down by a volley of fire from partly hidden
colonists. The IMC man fell against John Ashe, knocking him backwards. Ashe
struggled to get up again, but the IMC man lay where he was, dead.

'Stop shooting!' It was Captain Dent's voice, shouting from behind a crate
of seed. His hand came into sight waving a white handkerchief. 'We give in.'
Almost at once the shooting stopped.

'Stand up,' shouted Winton from his hiding-place. 'Tell your men to drop
their guns'



For a few seconds nothing happened - no shots, and the men on both sides
still lying concealed. Then Captain Dent slowly stood up and threw his gun on to
the ground. He was white with the fear that some colonist might take this golden
opportunity to shoot him.

'We are heavily outnumbered,' Dent called. 'I order all IMC personnel to
lay down their guns immediately.'

Now Winton stood up, too. 'You must radio your men in your spaceship,'
he called to Dent, 'and tell them of your surrender. If they refuse, you and all
your men here will be killed.' He turned to the colonists. 'Round up the prisoners,
and collect their guns.'

Everyone came out of hiding now, the IMC men with their hands raised.
The women emerged and started to tend the wounded. Winton caught sight of
the Master with Ashe and the Doctor and came over to them, his gun on the
Master. 'We've had enough of you, too,' he said to the Master. 'You'll leave with
the IMC men.'

The Master, quickly slipping his own gun out of sight, smiled at Winton.
'I don't think you understand the position you are now in,' he said. 'Unless you
want Earth Government to send a space fleet to blow you out of the skies, you
need someone to negotiate for you.'

Asir, said, 'You'd still be willing to help us, Adjudicator?'
'Of course,' said the Master. 'You've acted rashly, but I am impressed by

your courage and determination.'
'Don't listen to him,' said the Doctor. 'He's trying to trick you.'
But the Master continued, ignoring the Doctor. 'There may be a case for

preserving your colony on the grounds of the planet's historical interest. If I could
investigate this claim, things might be very different. I should like to visit the
Primitive City .'

'I am trying to warn you,' said the Doctor to Ashe and Winton, 'this man is
not to be trusted. He is an impostor. You should check his credentials with Earth!'

They stepped back as a group of prisoners, which included Morgan, were
led away by Smedley and other colonists.

'May I ask, sir,' said the Master to the Doctor, 'exactly who you are?'
Both Winton and Ashe looked at the Doctor. 'Yes,' said Winton, 'you've

never really explained yourself.'
The Master put his arms round Ashe's and Winton's shoulders. 'Gentlemen,

I suggest that we continue our discussion uninterrupted. Now let us go
somewhere private to consider how I might intercede on your behalf with Earth
Government' And with that the Master led Ashe and Winton away from the
Doctor.

'Doctor,' said Jo, 'you've got to stop him. He's going to talk them into
believing him!'

'There may be another way,' said the Doctor. 'Come on.' He strode out of
the dome. Jo, not understanding, quickly followed him.



17 Captain Dent Thinks Twice

'Maintain parking orbit!'
Captain Dent barked the order to the IMC technicians in the control room.

They made the necessary adjustments and the IMC ship levelled off in its ascent
from the planet and went into a wide orbit.

Morgan entered. 'I've checked the stores,' he told Dent. 'They've taken our
buggies, all our guns and ammunition, even our rocket pistols. They also took
all our mining explosives.'

Caldwell looked across fromwhere he had watched Dent pilot the ship back
up into Space. 'How's the astrobeer supply and the stocks of victory champagne?'
he asked, not expecting an answer. The others ignored him.

Morgan said, 'What do we do now, Captain Dent?'
'Stay in parking orbit,' said Dent, 'and radio IMC on Earth for a gunship.'
'Is that going to look good on our work records,' said Morgan, 'asking for

help?'
Dent turned to him. 'Have you got any other ideas?' It wasn't a question,

more of an expression of despair.
'As a matter of fact,' said Morgan, 'there was one strange thing. When I

was being led out as a prisoner, that man the Doctor called the Adjudicator an
impostor.'

Dent gave thought to that. 'You remember,' he said at last, 'when I first met
the Adjudicator he refused to show me his identity card. I wonder...' Suddenly
he grabbed the radio-microphone and within a few moments was talking to the
Identification Tracing Department of IMC on Earth. He explained nothing of
what had happened, he simply asked for an identity check on the Adjudicator
of this section of the galaxy, a routine enquiry which could not reflect badly on
Captain Dent in any way. Ten minutes later, in reply to Dent's query, a telephoto
picture started to be printed line by line on the ship's telephoto machine. Dent
and Morgan watched with increasing interest as the face appeared. It was round,
chubby, the eyes were blue, the hair fair, and there was no beard. Caldwell looked
at the picture over Dent's shoulder.

'Well, well,' said Caldwell , 'I guess we all got fooled.'
'Had we better report this to Earth?' said Morgan.
'No,' said Dent. He had no intention of letting IMC on Earth know that he'd

been tricked. 'We'll handle this ourselves.'
'Without guns?' Morgan asked, and Dent noticed how Morgan had stopped

calling him 'sir' since things had gone against them.
'We shall have to be a bit craftier,' said Dent. He turned to the technicians.

'Prepare to go into landing orbit!'
As the IMC ship gently sank back onto the planet, cushioned by its

retrorockets, Captain Dent saw the sun tipping the western horizon. They landed
in a small valley 35 kilometres from the colonists' dome. Finally, the ship
steadied as it touched down on the planet's surface, and the motors were shut off.

'And now we wait,' said Captain Dent. 'Even without buggies, we can reach
the colonists within four hours. We shall wait until night.'



18 The Master's TARDIS

The Doctor and Jo stood outside the scarlet ship in which the Master had
arrived on the planet. 'It's just an ordinary spaceship,' remarked Jo, 'like the IMC
one, only smaller.'

The Doctor produced a key from his pocket. 'We shall soon know,' he said,
and tried the key in what seemed to be the only entrance hatch in the ship's side.
The key turned easily.

'How did you get that key?' Jo asked.
The Doctor winked. 'Oh, from a previous encounter I had with the Master.

Anyway, it works.' He pulled open the hatch and they went inside.
Jo looked about in astonishment. Except for minor differences, it was

exactly like the inside of the Doctor's TARDIS. 'It is a TARDIS,' she said. 'Why
did you want to come here?'

'To see what I can find,' said the Doctor evasively. 'Now be careful!' He
put a hand on Jo's shoulder to stop her going forward, and with the other hand
pointed to a small white light in the wall close to them. The light shone a beam
on to an electroplate opposite. 'A rather crude burglar alarm,' said the Doctor,
'let's duck under it'

They crawled on hands and knees under the beam of light, then stood up.
'What do you hope to find?' said Jo.

The Doctor was already looking in cupboards and drawers. 'Something that
might tell me why the Master has come to this planet,' he said. 'You try that
filings cabinet,' he said, pointing to a set of deep drawers.

Jo looked through the files. 'Do you think he's after that duralinium stuff,
like the IMC people?' she asked. But the Doctor was too busy making his own
search, or didn't think the question worth answering. Jo shrugged, and continued
searching through the files. Then she came across a folder containing a plastic
document bearing a colour photograph of a clean-shaven man with a round
chubby face, blue eyes, and fair hair. Wording on the document stated that it had
been issued by the Bureau of Interplanetary Affairs and described the bearer, one
Martin Jurgen, as an official Adjudicator. 'I think this is worth looking at,' Jo said,
showing the document to the Doctor. 'It's the man the Master is impersonating.'

The Doctor looked sadly at the photograph. 'Poor Martin Jurgen, whoever
he was, is probably floating for all eternity in Space, or atomised.'

'Well, come on,' said Jo, let's take that and show it to Mr. Ashe.' In her
eagerness as she made for the door her legs passed through the beam of light...

At that moment a bleep-bleep sound came from a pocket in the Master's
tunic. He was with John Ashe in the latter's quarters in the dome, and together
they were studying some crude maps which Ashe had drawn of the area of the
colony.

'Excuse me,' said the Master with a smile, and drew from his pocket a small
black box that fitted neatly into his palm. He opened a panel in the box, revealing
a tiny television screen. On it he could clearly see the Doctor and Jo in his
TARDIS. He didn't let Ashe see the screen.

'What's that?' said Ashe.



'A useful little device,' said the Master. 'A remote-control alarm in case
someone tampers with my spaceship. Probably one of the Primitives touched the
outside of the craft. It's of no importance.' He closed the panel. 'Now then, Mr.
Ashe, you were telling me about the underground Primitive City ?...'

As the Master returned the little black box into his pocket, his thumb gently
squeezed a button in its side.

'Come on, Doctor,' said Jo, 'what I found is enough to prove toMr. Ashe that
the Master isn't the Adjudicator. Let's go before the Master comes and catches
us here.'

The Doctor straightened up from the drawers he had been searching. 'All
right, Jo.' He turned, then froze. 'Jo! You've crossed back through the alarm
beam!' And already the button on the side of the Master's little alarm box had
activated poisonous gas to be pumped into the TARDIS. It came through six
grills set near the floor, and it came under pressure. Its effect was to be almost
instantaneous. The ship's only exit door automatically closed.

Half-an-hour later the Doctor started to come to. He was lying where he
had fallen, looking up into the Master's face. The Master had an aerosol spray in
his hand, aimed at the Doctor. 'A little device to speed up the recovery of those
overcome by my sleeping gas,' said the Master, now putting aside the aerosol
spray can. 'How are you feeling?'

The Doctor had a sick headache. He looked round for Jo. 'Where is Miss
Grant?' he asked.

'Over there,' said the Master. He pointed to a tall up-right glass cubicle. Jo
was inside, sitting on the floor with her head between her legs. 'She's perfectly
safe,' said the Master, ' and secure. In a short time she'll sleep off that whiff of
gas and wake up. However,' he continued, producing his bleep-bleep box, 'this
little gadget has more than one control. The black button is for sleeping gas. But
the red button, once pressed, would fill Miss Grant's glass case with nerve gas.
She would die within a few minutes of total paralysis.' He put the little black box
into his tunic pocket. 'Now Doctor, I understand you've visited the Primitives'
underground city. I want you to take me there.'

The Doctor slowly got to his feet. ' That's the real reason for your coming
to this planet, isn't it?'

'Possibly,' said the Master. 'Shall we go?'
'The Primitives don't like intruders,' said the Doctor. 'It may be dangerous.'
'You've been there and come out alive,' said the Master. 'In any case,

concern yourself solely with Miss Grant's welfare. And mine. So remember, if
any harm comes to me, I shall press that red button.' He went to the door and
held it open for the Doctor. 'One thing puzzles me, though. How did you get into
my TARDIS?'

'Without difficulty,' said the Doctor, avoiding a direct answer, and hoping
that the Master wasn't going to press the point.

'Well,' said the Master, 'you were still caught by the burglar alarm, so not to
worry.' They were outside now and he stopped to close and lock the hatch. With
the Master's back turned, the Doctor quietly dropped the key on the soft dusty
soil at his feet, in the hope that someone might find it. The Master turned back
to him, pocketing his own key. 'All right then, Doctor, lead me to the Primitives'
underground city!'



'What is it you want there?' asked the Doctor, genuinely puzzled.
'What have I ever wanted?' replied the Master. 'Power! Complete and total

power! And through you, Doctor, I am going to get it.'



19 The Return of Captain Dent

John Ashe lay in bed, trying to read in order to calm his troubled mind.
He had brought two books with him from Earth, one was on agriculture, from
the days before all Earth's food was taken from the seas; the other was copy
of something written thousands of yews ago, and was largely about someone
called God. It was this second book he now tried to read, not because he really
understood it, but because the strange language fascinated him. It contained four
versions of a story about a man who sacrificed his own life for the the sake of
others. It was this part of the book that most interested Ashe, because it was so
difficult to understand. Why, he asked himself, should anyone willingly give his
own life for other people? His thinking as interrupted by Winton and Smedley
entering his sleeping quarters.

'Where's the Adjudicator?' said Winton.
Ashe put down the book. 'Why do you want him?'
'We're sending him back to Earth,' said Smedley, 'right now.'
'But he may be able to help us,' Ashe said. 'Although he took a decision

against us, he is really a fair man. He believes we may have grounds for an
appeal.'

'He's twisted you round his little finger,' Winton said. 'Where's he gone?'
Ashe knew it was no good arguing. 'To his spaceship. He said he was going

to meet the Doctor there.'
'That's another one we want off this planet,' said Smedley. 'We've never

really known where he came from.'
Ashe hoped they would leave him now, but they had other pressing

business. 'We want those IMC guns,' said Winton. They lay in a crate next to
Ashe's bed.

'You've no need for them,' said Ashe. 'You've already got your own guns'
'Ours are like pea-shooters compared with the IMC guns,' said Winton.

'What if Earth Government sends soldiers? - we'll need high-powered guns then.'
'If that happens,' Ashe said, 'I'll issue them. But if the Adjudicator helps us

it will never come to that.'
'Yes,' said Smedley, ' if. '
'You know I'm the leader now,' said Winton. 'Those guns should be under

my authority!'
'Except,' said Ashe, 'I happen to have them in here. So get out of my

quarters!'
Winton and Smedley turned and went away, slamming the door of Ashe's

sleeping room. Ashe got up from his bed to lock the door, to make sure Winton
couldn't come back when Ashe was asleep to take the guns. Then he had second
thoughts. Doors were never locked in the dome, except to stop the Primitives
from stealing their scarce food supplies. If Winton found the door locked, it
would be thought an aggressive act by Ashe. And Ashe believed that with
patience he could win back the support of the colonists. He knew Winton meant
well, but the colony needed Ashe's calmness and maturity. He got back onto his
bed, and tried once more to read his book.



There was a gentle tap on the door. 'Come in,' he called, hoping it was
Winton so that they could make friends again. There was another tap. 'I said
“come in” he called. Suddenly the door burst open and Morgan and Captain
Dent rushed into the room and pinioned Ashe on his bed before he could move.
The room seemed suddenly full with the black uniforms of IMC guards as they
helped themselves to their high-powered weapons.

A moment later, Ashe heard shots from the colonists' shotguns down the
corridor. An IMC guard reeled into the room, shot in the head. Other IMC guards
took up defensive positions in the doorway and returned the fire.

Dent held a handgun at Ashe's head andMorgan went to the door and called
to the colonists, 'Stop firing or we kill Ashe!'

The firing continued, and Ashe wondered if none of the colonists now cared
whether he lived or died. Morgan called again, this time louder, 'Stop firing or
we kill Ashe on the count of three. One, two...' The firing abruptly stopped.

Still holding the gun at Ashe's head, Dent ordered, 'Have all the colonists
in the outlying domes brought in for the trial.'

Morgan went away to carry out Dent's orders. 'Trial?' said Ashe. 'What
trial?'

'The Adjudicator's decision made me legal Governor of this planet,' said
Dent. 'You will be charged with armed rebellion against Earth Government.
Under the law, every man who carried a gun can be executed.'

'You'd never do that,' said Ashe. 'The ordinary people on Earth would be
horrified. They'd turn against IMC, and make the Earth Government disown
you!'

Dent smiled. 'Perhaps you've got a point there,' he said, putting away his
gun now all danger was over. 'So I might give you an alternative.' The smile
suddenly faded, 'You can pack yourself and all your colonist friends into that old
spaceship of yours and get off this planet!'

'Our spaceship can never make another journey,' said Ashe, 'it's too old.
Don't you realise what may happen?'

'Every year,' said Dent, 'thousands of people are killed in accidents. My
only concern is the good name of IMC. Whatever happens to you all once you're
off this planet, it can't reflect on us'

Morgan returned. 'Captain Dent, sir,' he said - Dent noted with satisfaction
thatMorgan had started calling him 'sir' again - 'the guards are rounding up all the
colonists. I've also searched the dome for that fake Adjudicator but he isn't here.'

Ashe said, 'Did you say fake Adjudicator?'
Dent was aroused. 'Of course, you're hoping that he'll help you people

against us! Sorry, but you'll get no assistance from that direction. I want to find
out who he is and what his game is. Where is he?'

'I don't know,' Ashe lied. He had no reason to believe anything Dent said.
'Or don't you want to tell us,' said Dent. He turned back to Morgan, 'Go and

check his spaceship. If it's locked, use explosives. Take Caldwell with you.'
' Caldwell ?' said Morgan. He had come to think of Caldwell as not to be

trusted, all too often Caldwell had said a good word for the colonists. Morgan
knew that to do his job properly he had to hate the colonists.

'I said, take Caldwell .' Dent did not like his orders being questioned. 'He's
our mining expert - he knows how to use explosives.'



Morgan had noticed the sting in Dent's voice. 'Yes, sir,' he said, 'right away,
sir.' He hurried off, pushing by two IMC guards who held between them a
colonist prisoner.

'Sir,' said one of the guards, 'this is the man you particularly wanted to see.'
Dent looked at the frightened face of the colonist. It was the man who had

hit Dent in the face when Dent was trussed to his own captain's chair in the IMC
ship. 'You hit me,' said Dent. The man was too terrified to speak. 'And now I
can do what I like with you.' He raised his handgun and pointed it straight at
the man's head.

'No!' shouted Ashe. 'That's plain murder!'
But Dent had had no real intention of shooting the man. Slowly he lowered

his gun. 'Why should I waste a single bullet, when you'll all soon be in that rickety
old spaceship of yours, and die together?'



20 The Doomsday Weapon

Caldwell and Morgan walked well away from the scarlet spaceship, then
both lay down flat on the ground to avoid the blast. They had tried battering on
the hatch of the spaceship, but there had been no response from inside. Then
they had tried to break it open with long-handled hatchets, but the hatchets had
broken. Now Caldwell had smeared plastic explosive all round the hatch.

'If this doesn't do it,' said Caldwell , 'nothing will. Here goes.' He pressed
the button of the remote-control detonator. There was a violent flash of flame,
followed by the roar of the explosion. Both men got up and walked back to where
the smoke was clearing.

'I hear you checked over the colonists' spaceship for them,' said Morgan.
Caldwell nodded. 'The least I could do.'
'Do they stand a chance?' asked Morgan.
'If they can ever get into free flight,' said Caldwell . 'But the whole thing's

more likely to blow itself to pieces during take-off.'
'Then I'll stand well clear,' said Morgan, and laughed.
'You really hate colonists, don't you?' said Caldwell .
'I hate misfits,' said Morgan. Tlrcy were now at the spaceship's hatch. The

explosives hadn't even made a mark on the surface. 'I can't believe it,' said
Morgan. 'Your sure you used real explosives?'

But Caldwell was staring at the key on the ground by his foot, and now
picked it up. 'Why should anyone leave this lying around?' he said, and tried it
in the lock. It turned easily, and Caldwell opened the door. Morgan went in first,
then stopped dead.

'The size of this place,' saidMorgan inwonder. He shook his head, as though
uncertain whether he was imagining things. 'It's bigger inside than out!'

Caldwell had already seen Jo standing up in the glass box, waving
frantically. He hurried across to her, walking straight through the beam of the
burglar alarm.

The Doctor and the Master had reached the end of the trail that led to the
Primitives' underground city. The Master stared at the face of rock. 'Well,' he
said, 'how do we get in?'

'I haven't the remotest idea,' said the Doctor truthfully.
'Come now, Doctor,' said the Master, effecting his most charming smile,

'we haven't come all this way just to look at a face of rock? Show me how this
rock opens.'

'I think it's keyed by thought waves,' said the Doctor. 'But I've no idea how
to do it. Perhaps you should have considered this possibility before you insisted
on my coming with you

The Master's smile was fast fading. 'Is there some other way in?'
'Very likely,' said the Doctor, 'but I don't know that either.'
'You're hardly being helpful, Doctor.' The Master tapped the pocket

containing the little black box. 'I only have to touch the red button and Miss
Grant will be dead within a few seconds...'



And at that moment the bleep-bleep sound came from the black box.
Puzzled, theMaster reached into his pocket, brought out the little box and opened
its flap.

On the miniature television screen he saw Caldwell breaking open the glass
cubicle containing Jo. In sudden anger theMaster put his finger on the red button.
But at that moment the Doctor took advantage of the Master's distraction. With
a high kick, he sent the little black box flying out of the Master's hand. With one
hand stinging from the kick, the Master leapt backwards and at the same time
whipped out his handgun. But the Doctor had anticipated this, and flung himself
at the Master's legs. The two of them fell to the ground, the Doctor struggling
to gain possession of the gun. All at once the gun was lifted from the Master's
hand by the hand of a Primitive. The Doctor and the Master looked up. From the
darkness, Primitives had appeared and were now surrounding them, their spears
raised.

Jo was brought into the colonists' dome betweenMorgan and Caldwell. The
place was filled with colonists each carrying some small item of tattered luggage.
Dent was shouting at the armed IMC guards, 'These people are taking too much
time. Keep them moving!' The guards started to herd the people down one of
the corridors, the one that led to the entrance of their old spaceship. Then Dent
noticed Jo. 'Where did you find her?' Caldwell explained. Dent showed little
interest in why Jo had been a prisoner. 'What about that fake Adjudicator,' he
asked; 'that's what I sent you for!'

'I think he wanted the Doctor to take him to the Primitives' underground
city,' said Jo.

Dent looked puzzled. 'What's she talking about?'
'She tried to explain to us said Morgan. 'I can't make head nor tail of it. But

if they've gone off there, they'll probably be killed by those savages.'
'Maybe,' said Dent. 'I'll send a squad of men after them once we've got rid

of these characters,' and he indicated the colonists. 'Now Morgan, I want to get
things moving .'

'Yes, sir,' said Morgan. and hurried away. Within a moment he was
chivvying the colonists, hitting those who weren't moving fast enough.

'What about the girl?' Caldwell said.
Dent was about to move away. 'Oh, shove her in with the colonists,' he said,

then went to help the guards herd the people down the corridor.
'I've got to stay here,' Jo pleaded. 'We've got to find theMaster and stop him.'
'The who?' said Caldwell .
'You call him the Adjudicator,' she said, 'but he's really called the Master.

He's a sort of super-criminal.'
'Oh, sure,' said Caldwell , scoffing. 'Any more stories like that?'
Jo looked up at Caldwell . 'Why don't you stop being so stupid?'
Caldwell was amused at being spoken to like that. 'You're a very cheeky

young woman, you know.'
'It's time someone showed some sense,' Jo went on. 'The Master killed the

real Adjudicator and took his place. There must be some reason for that, mustn't
there?'

'I suppose so,' said Caldwell . 'Go on.'



'There's something in that Primitive city that's tremendously important,' Jo
said. 'Can't you understand that?'

'You heard what Captain Dent said,' Caldwell answered. 'He's going to send
a squad of our men later on.'

'Later on may be' too late,' said Jo. 'Have you got anything to do right now,
apart from herding those poor people on to that old spaceship?'

'I've got no part in that,' Caldwell said quickly.
'Then how about doing something useful?' she said. 'The two of us could

find out what the Master's really after.'
Caldwell took a quick look round. The place was cleared now of colonists,

and both Morgan and Dent had gone out of sight driving the colonists down the
corridor. 'There's a buggy outside,' he said. 'Let's go.' The two of them hurried
out into the night.

Dent, Morgan, and some IMC guards returned from their efforts of packing
the colonists irate the old spaceship. Dent said, 'I didn't see that hothead Winton
get on the ship.'

'We'll search for him right away,' said Morgan.
But Dent checked him. 'Forget it. There's bound to be a few we missed out.

We can pick them off at our leisure. I want all IMC personnel well clear of this
area in case that old ship blows up while it's still on the ground.'

'If we aren't here,' said Morgan, 'what's to stop the colonists getting out of
the ship and spreading all over the place again?'

Dent thought about that. 'Plant one guard with night binoculars on the
nearest hill. Have him keep an eye on the spaceship from a safe distance until it
takes off - or disintegrates on the ground!'

As Morgan and Dent moved away, Winton emerged from behind some
sacks of seed and hurried out of the dome into the darkness.

The Doctor was once more a prisoner in the underground room with the
frieze that told the story of the planet; but this time his companionwas theMaster.

'I thought you could communicate with these Primitives,' said the Master.
'They didn't hurt us,' answered the Doctor. 'Under the circumstances I

thought they were quite pleasant.'
'Quite pleasant?!' The Master rubbed a bruised shoulder. 'They were

extremely rough.'
'At least they didn't kill us,' said the Doctor. 'And they had the sense to

relieve you of your gun.'
The loss of the gun obviously worried the Master. To cover his concern he

turned to the series of wall pictures. 'Don't you think this is fascinating, Doctor?
The whole story of the planet is here.'

The Doctor took another look at the crude pictures. 'If it is, perhaps you'd
be good enough to explain it to me.'

'Delighted,' said the Master. 'This underground city was once the centre of
a great civilisation. Through genetic engineering they developed a super-race.'

'The ones in long robes,' said the Doctor, 'with animal faces?'
'That's right...' TheMaster was about to continue, but theDoctor interrupted,

'You've deduced all that from these pictures?'
'Gracious no,' said the Master. 'It was all in the files of the Time Lords,

which I was able to acquire.'



'Why are you so interested in the history of this planet?' asked the Doctor.
'This super-race,' said the Master, 'developed a super-weapon. Then some

degeneration set in in the life strain, and they never used it'
'I see,' said the Doctor, the pictures now making more sense to him. 'And

the super-race have become the priests of a lunatic religion that serves machines
which they think of as gods?'

'Something like that,' said the Master.
'Well, I think I should remind you that this religion included sacrifice,' said

the Doctor, 'and my guess is that we are the intended victims.'
'Surely two brains such as ours,' said the Master, 'can overcome that

problem, especially when the Doomsday Weapon, as it is called, is within our
grasp.'

'What do you hope to do with this weapon?'
The Master pulled at his beard, contemplating the prospect. 'There may

never be any need to use it. The mere threat of its use can hold the whole galaxy
to ransom.'

The Doctor said, 'How did you know that these awful IMC people would
be coming to this planet?'

The Master was about to answer as the door slowly opened. The Doctor
noticed that the Master's hand quickly slipped into his tunic pockets, although
he had no gun there now. The long-robed creature with the otter face slowly
entered, followed by a phalanx of Primitives.

'Perhaps I should have mentioned,' the Doctor told the Master, 'that I'm
known in these parts. I got away with my life once, but it certainly won't happen
again.'

But the Master wasn't listening. 'We come in peace and friendship,' he said
loudly to the otter face. '1 wish to talk with the Guardian of the Doomsday
Weapon.'

As the priest stared at the Master blindly, the Master's hand suddenly came
from his pocket clutching a handful of tiny silver capsules which he threw on to
the floor. With his other hand he produced a gas-mask and held it to his face.
As the capsules cracked on the floor each emitted a cloud of gas. The Primitives
clutched their throats, choking for air, eyes streaming with tears, and the priest
wheeled round in circles screaming. 'This way,' said the Master to the Doctor
through his gas-mask, 'and do try to hold your breath.'

As the Master hurried out of the room he saw that one of the choking
Primitives now had his gun attached to a waist-band. The Master ripped it off
the band, then rushed out of the mom. The Doctor, covering his mouth and nose
with a handkerchief, hurried after him.

Escaping the gas and the the demented Primitives, the Master ran blindly
down one corridor after another, the Doctor on his heels. Finally, the Master
stopped and removed his gas-mask. He kept his gun aimed at the Doctor.

'You realise,' said the Doctor, 'that if they catch us now they will certainly
kill us?'

'Then let as avoid being caught,' said the Master. With his free hand he
producedfrom a pocket a tattered old map and studied it carefully. 'I think we
are very near to our goal.'



'Since I've been no use to you up to now,' said the Doctor, 'why do you want
me to come along?'

The Master gave his most charming smile. 'The company down here is so
boring,' he said, 'and at least we understand each other. Now you read the map
while I hold the gun on you so that you don't desert me in this gloomy place.' He
gave the map to the Doctor; it showed the many corridors, rooms and galleries
in the underground city. Over the square indicating one room a big X had been
drawn. 'There's where we're making for,' said the Master. 'I don't think it should
be too difficult for a fellow of your intelligence to lead us there.'

With the Master's gun pressed lightly in his back, the Doctor had no option
but to try to steer their way through the maze of corridors. Very soon the Doctor
recognised the corridors as those where he and Jo had been taken when they
met the Guardian. On turning a final corner they could see at the dead-end of a
corridor the huge double-doors and two Primitives standing guard.

'Is that it?' asked the Master.
'Yes,' said the Doctor, 'and it's guarded.'
The Master stroked his beard, thinking. 'This raises an interesting problem.

If I raise my gun to shoot first one guard and then the other, then the gun cannot
be pointing at you.'

'True,' said the Doctor.
'And you,' said the Master, 'could knock it out of my hand.'
'I would try to do it without hurting you,' said the Doctor.
'Nonetheless,' said the Master, 'using your Venusian karate you would soon

render me unconscious, and then try to take me prisoner. Of course, I could let
you run away at this point, and that would leave me free to deal with those two
guards.'

'To murder them, you mean,' said the Doctor.
'What are the lives of two savages,' said the Master, 'compared with the

value of bringing peace and order to the whole galaxy? Still, you always were
sentimental, Doctor.' He paused to give the problem more consideration. 'I'm
afraid there's only one practical solution. Regrettably I must shoot you first, then
very quickly pick off the two guards before they have time to move.'

'Or,' said the Doctor, 'we might simply ask the two guards to go away.'
'How? They don't seem to understand anything we say,
'By telepathy,' said the Doctor. 'I'm sure that's how they cornmunicate, and

how the priests give them their orders. May I ask them to go away on your
behalf?'

'Is this some trick?' The Master held the gun menacingly close to the
Doctor's head.

'In a sense, but not one aimed against you. Certainly among humans,' said
the Doctor, 'telepathy takes place when two people's minds give off alpha waves
at a cyclic rate between 9 and 11 per second. If I can find the cyclic rate of these
Primitives, I can order them to leave that door unguarded.'

This appealed to the Master's intellect. 'All right,' he said, 'have a go. Let's
see what you can do.'

The Doctor stared down the long corridor where the Primitives guarded the
huge doors. He knew it was no use putting his command into words in his mind,
for the Primitives might not understand. Instead he forced into his imagination a



picture of the two guards laying down their spears andwalking away from the big
doors. He repeated this picture over and over again in his mind as he struggled
to control his own brain to transmit only alpha thought-waves at the correct rate
per second. To blot out from his mind that the guards were still standing by the
door, he closed his eyes, then again repeated the mental picture.

'One of them moved!' whispered the Master. 'You're getting through.'
The Doctor tried again, this time at a much higher rate per second. The

Master jogged his arm and he opened his eyes. 'Look,' said the Master excitedly.
'They're going!'

The two Primitives had put down their spears, and now they were slowly
walking down the corridor towards where theDoctor and theMaster were hiding.
The Doctor and the Master pressed themselves back into an alcove, and the two
Primitives slowly walked by them like sleep-walkers. When they had gone well
out of sight the Master tugged at the Doctor's sleeve. 'Come on, you go first.'

The huge doors were not locked and were quite easy to open. The Doctor
was back once more in the room whose walls were made of silvery-coloured
metal. The Master looked about himself in satisfaction. 'The Doomsday
Weapon,' he said; 'the most powerful weapon in the entire universe.'

'You mean that thing?' The Doctor indicated the drum-like object in the
middle of the floor.

'This whole room,' said the Master, 'and the hundreds of miles of corridors
of electronic equipment that stem from this room. It is all the Doomsday
Weapon. That,' and he pointed to the construction in the middle of the floor,
'is the control console.' He went to the console and gently ran his fingers over
the controls. 'With this our control, we can rule all life on every planet in every
galaxy.'

'We?' said the Doctor.
'Of course,' said theMaster. 'Arewe not both Time Lords? Isn't it our destiny

to work together as partners?'
The Doctor heard sounds coming from the corridor. 'I think it may shortly

be our destiny to die together if we're caught in here.'
The huge doors slowly started to open. 'Over here,' said the Master, waving

his gun at the Doctor. There was nowhere in the room to hide, so the two of them
took up a position with their backs to the wall close to the doors. TheMaster kept
his gun at the ready. The huge doors continued to open, and then ten or more of
the otter-faced priests entered. The Master and the Doctor stood there in wonder
to see what the priests were about to do.

Using their buggies for quick transport, Captain Dent and the IMC men
were now 35 safe kilometres away from the colonists' spaceship. Only one IMC
guard remained near, a volunteer who was sitting lookout on a hill near the
colonists' dome, using night binoculars for any sign of the colonists leaving their
craft. Once back in his ship, Captain Dent went straight to the control room and
sat comfortably in his captain's chair. He turned to the radio microphone.

' Captain Dent to colonists' spaceship, ' he said. ' Do you hear me? '
There was a crackle of static, then Ashe's voice. ' We hear you, Captain

Dent. '
' What's delaying you? ' said Dent.



' An electrical fault in our life-support system, ' said Ashe. ' We are just
completing repairs. '

' Good, ' said Dent. ' Then get off this planet! '
He switched off the microphone. Morgan had come up behind him. 'That's

a laugh,' said Morgan. 'They don't need a life-support system, not if that old crate
is going to blow itself to pieces!'

Dent turned on the microphone again, and tuned into the IMC guards'
frequency. ' Captain Dent here, ' he said into the microphone, ' speaking to
lookout guard. Any sign of movement around that old spaceship? '

The guard's voice came back clearly. ' No, sir. Their hatch remains closed.
No one's tried to leave the ship. '

' Keep watching, ' said Dent. ' If that hatch opens one millimetre, tell me
immediately. '

' Yes, sir, ' said the guard's voice.
Dent switched off the microphone, leaving the wave-length open for

incoming transmissions. He thought for a moment, then turned to Morgan, 'Get
the men ready to go over to that so-called Primitive City .'

'Couldn't it wait till daylight?' said Morgan. 'Once that old ship's taken off,
there's only us and that fake Adjudicator and that Doctor man left on the planet.
We can wipe them out in no time.'

'I want everything finished and done with tonight,'. said Dent. 'By first light
I want to radio IMC Headquarters on Earth and tell them to send in the heavy
mining gear, and I want to be able to report that this planet is entirely clear of
everyone. So get moving!'

'Yes, sir,' said Morgan, and hurried out to get ready the guards.
Captain Dent sat thinking. Then he turned the ship's external television eye

in the direction of the sky over the colonists' dome and spaceship. He hoped
that very soon he would see the glare of the colonists' ship taking off on its last
journey.

The IMC guard acting as lookout crouched on top of the little hill
overlooking the colonists' spaceship, his night binoculars piercing the darkness
as he watched the hatch of the ship. He was cold and the rocky surface was
too uncomfortable to sit on. He had volunteered for the job because it would be
recorded in his personnel file, and he earnestly wanted to become a First Officer
so that he would get a bigger living unit on Earth. His arms ached through trying
to hold the binoculars with one hand and his high-powered rifle with the other.
Then he questioned why he was holding the rifle, since all the colonists were in
their spaceship. He put the rifle down, and now he was able to use both hands to
hold the heavy binoculars. Almost as soon as he had put down the rifle, Winton
sprang at him from the darkness, battering at him with a knife-sharp rock.

Jo stood by while Caldwell fixed one of the front wheels of the buggy. In
the darkness they had hit a rock, knocking out the track of the buggy's steering
gear. More than once they had lost track of the footprints and track marks that
were guiding them to the entrance of the Primitives' underground city. Caldwell
straightened up.

'That should be all right,' he said. 'Get back on'
As Jo climbed on the seat next to Caldwell they both heard the distant roar

of the old spaceship's rocket motors. They turned and looked. The spaceship



rose slowly into the night sky, a downthrust plume of flame lifting it higher and
higher.

'Well; said Caldwell , starting up the buggy, 'they made it.' He grinned with
relief, and the buggy began to more dowly forward.

All at once a brilliant flash lit all the land around them like daylight. It was
followed by a momentous explosion as the colonists' spaceship disintegrated.

Caldwell stopped the buggy. He was unable to speak.
'All those poor people,' said Jo.
'Yes,' said Caldwell at last. 'All those poor people. Dead.'
He started the buggy again and they drove ahead slowly and in total silence.
The Doctor and the Master stood with their backs pressed to the silvery-

coloured wall as two more priests entered carrying with them a casket. 'If you
play your telepathy trick,' whispered theMaster, 'and warn them of our presence,
I shall shoot you instantly.'

'If they know of our presence,' whispered the Doctor, 'there will be no need
for you to shoot me. We shall both be killed.'

The priests all made a ritual bow to the drum-like control console in the
middle of the room. Then they turned towards the hatch in the wall and opened
it. Heat from the furnace inside filled the room. Two priests went forward with
the casket, a third with long tongs. The lid of the casket was removed and the S-
shaped ends of the tongs were dipped into the casket. When the tongs were lifted,
they gripped an isotope - fuel for a nuclear reactor. The priest slowly thrust the
isotope deep into the white hot furnace.

The Master whispered, 'They most be refuelling the weapon.
'My guess,' whispered the Doctor, 'is that it's a religious ceremony with a

scientific basis. It most have been going on for generations.'
The otter faced priests slowly backed away from the now closed hatch, and

backed out through the two, huge doors. The doors were closed from the outside.
The Master moved away from the wall , 'Now, Doctor,' he said, very reassured
again, 'let us see what the Doomsday Weapon can do.' He inspected the controls
on top of the drum-shaped console, then pressed one of the buttons. The colour of
the whole of the wall on one side of the room changed from silvery grey to dark
blue and then to black. Little spots of light appeared. 'How ingenious,' said the
Master; 'before our eyes, the galaxy.' He turned a calibrated knob on the control
console, and the little spots of light started swimming towards them at enormous
speed. The picture of the galaxy was focussing down to one particular spot of
light in the centre. After some moments this central spot of light had increased
from a spot to a small white disc. Now the Master touched another control and
the picture of the galaxy settled and stopped moving. 'That disc,' said the Master,
'is the sun of the planet Earth that you're so fond of. As you know, that sun will
eventually burn through to its own core and explode - in about ten thousand
million years' time. But with this weapon I can set that motion in progress now.'

'To what purpose?' asked the Doctor. 'Sheer destruction?'
'Doctor,' said the Master somewhat hurt, 'have you ever known me to be

vindictive?' He continued before the Doctor had time to answer. 'Naturally the
weapon will never be used provided people obey my commands. But to achieve
this end, I need your help. The weapon is complex, it needs intelligent minds to
operate it. So think of it, Doctor - a half-share in the Universe.' He stepped back



and again levelled his gun at the Doctor. 'What is your decision? - to accept my
generous offer, or instant death?'

' There will be no decision. '
The voice came from the furnace. Both the Doctor and the Master whirled

round to look as the hatch slowly opened. Floating up from the flames was the
Guardian. It pointed a finger at the Master's gun and instantly he dropped the
gun and grabbed at his burnt hand. The gun turned white with heat where it lay
on the floor, then melted.

'There will be no decision,' the Guardian repeated, 'because now you most
both account to me. Do not try to run away. For you, there is no escape.'

Caldwell shone a strong torch on to the face of rock at the end of the trail.
'They took you through this rock?'

'It opens somehow,' said Jo. 'But I don't know how.'
'Maybe we've found the wrong section of rock,' said Caldwell .
'No, it was definitely here. Anyway, look at all these footprints.' From the

spill of light from Caldwell 's torch Jo could see many footprints all around them.
Caldwell shone the torch on to the ground, and scratched his chin. 'Yes,

you're right. Some of them seem to lead straight into the rock. How about looking
round for another entrance somewhere?'

Jo didn't like this idea because there was no certainty of ever finding another
way into the Primitives' city. But she didn't want to disagree with Caldwell too
much in case he decided to get back on to the buggy and return to the IMC ship.
'All right,' she said, 'so long as we find the Doctor.'

They got back onto the buggy. Caldwell was just about to start it when
the rock began to open. Jo exclaimed, 'Look!' But Caldwell was already off the
buggy and hurrying round to stand flat against the rock next to where it was
opening. The rock door continued to open and a Primitive stepped out. Caldwell
edged along the rock, then clenched his right fist, raised it, and brought it down
like a hammer on the back of the Primitive's head. The Primitive fell forward,
sprawling in the dust.

'Quick!' Caldwell grabbed the rock door to stop it from closing again. Jo
leapt off the buggy and rushed into the entrance, followed by Caldwell . The rock
door closed shut behind them. They looked down the long corridor cut through
the rock.

'Where now?' said Caldwell .
'I don't know,' said Jo truthfully. 'This is where the search really begins.'
The Guardian addressed itself to the Doctor. 'Why have you returned?'
'I was brought here against my will,' said the Doctor.
The Master still couldn't believe his eyes. 'What is it?' he asked the Doctor

quietly. 'How can it live in that heat?'
'I think it's the ultimate development of life on this planet,' the Doctor

whispered.
'You,' said the Guardian, looking at the Master, 'what do you want here?'
TheMaster smiled. 'To restore this city and this planet to their former glory.

You have here a wonderful invention. With it we can bring peace and order to
every inhabited world in the Universe. Your planet will be the centre of a mighty
empire, the greatest the cosmos has ever known.'



'This invention,' said the Guardian slowly, 'has destroyed us. Once the
weapon had been built our race began to decay. The radiation from its power
source poisoned the soil and even the upper atmosphere.'

'Exactly,' said the Doctor. 'The weapon has only brought death.' He pointed
at the Master. 'This man wants to spread that death throughout the Universe.
Only you can stop him. You must destroy the weapon.'

'I am the Guardian of the weapon, and its radiation gives me life.'
'Then I am afraid,' said the Doctor, 'you must give up your own life so that

others may survive,'
'Don't listen to such rubbish,' said the Master. 'You can continue to live, and

I shall protect you!With the DoomsdayWeapon, I shall protect all the Universe.'
'Against what,' said the Guardian, 'will you protect the Universe?'
The question took the Master off balance. 'Well,' he said, 'against anyone

who tries to attack it.'
'But the Universe is all matter in Space,' said the Guardian. 'So what can

attack that which is everything?'
'I... I shall protect it against itself,' said the Master, desperately wishing to

get out of this discussion. 'I shall protect it against evil-doers.'
The Guardian said nothing for some moments. Then, it spoke again, 'The

price is too high, the risk too great. The weapon is too terrible to be under the
control of any creature that might use it.'

'Surely it is under your control?' said the Master, who clearly now doubted
whether the Guardian actually controlled the weapon.

'No,' said the Guardian. 'I am only the Guardian. I have the power, as you
saw, to destroy that small metal weapon with which you menaced your
companion, but I have no power to destroy you. The controls of the Doomsday
Weapon are at your side, there for you to command.'

The Master looked at the control console. 'Then I am now the master of the
Universe,' he said. He strode over to the controls filled with a sense of victory
and total power. 'That planet you so favour,' he said to the Doctor, 'the one called
Earth, can become a cloud of ashes at my touch. Even the Daleks will tremble
when they know my power!'

'But this is not to be,' said the Guardian. It turned to the Doctor. 'This man
proves you are right. The Doomsday Weapon is not only evil, but it creates evil
in others. It must be destroyed. And therefore I must die.'

The little doll-like figure of the Guardian began to fade hack into the flames.
TheMaster swung round to the open hatch. 'Just a minute,' he shouted, 'you and I
canmake an arrangement. I didn't reallymean to use the weapon, only to frighten
a few worlds.' The Guardian was already only half visible in the flames. 'Please
come back,' screamed the Master. 'I am very clever. I may be able to restore you
to the creature you were before you got so small and lived in those flames.' Only
the head of the Guardian was now visible. 'Let's discuss this a little longer! Please
don't go away!' But the image of the Guardian had now vanished completely.
The Master turned away from the hatch, angry that he had shown himself so
upset in front of the Doctor. 'Well,' he said, 'I've still got the DoomsdayWeapon.
Do you wish to share it with me?'

'I somehow think,' said the Doctor, 'that very shortly there will be nothing
to share...'



The Doctor's words were swamped by a terrible roaring sound from within
the furnace. A blistering wave of heat swept out from the hatch. Than the first
sheet of flame burst from the hatch. The whole room started to tremble! The
Master stared unbelieving at the now belching furnace. 'You fool,' he screamed,
'you're destroying yourself! You're destroying the Doomsday Weapon!'

'And it'll destroy us if we don't get out of here,' said the Doctor. Another
great sheet of flame burst from the furnace. The room trembled violently and a
huge crack appeared down one of its silvery-coloured metal walls. 'If you don't
mind, I'm leaving before we get roasted to death. I suggest you do the same.'

The Doctor ran to the doors, then realised the Master was not following
him. He turned back to see the Master still staring at the furnace as though
mesmerised. 'Come on, man,' he called, 'you'll be killed!' The room trembled
again as in an earthquake. Flames were now bursting from the furnace. 'We've
got to get away!' called the Doctor.

The Master turned to him. 'The Doomsday Weapon,' he said, 'it will never
be mine.' Then he followed the Doctor. As they left the room flames spewed out
from the hatch engulfing the control console.

As they ran down the first corridor the floor was quaking, the rock walls
trembling. 'Which way?' called the Master. They came to an intersection which
the Doctor thought he recognised. 'This way, I think,' said the Doctor, and kept
running. The Master kept up behind him. There was no sign of any otter faced
priests or the Primitives. Cracks started to appear in the rock walls and roof.
Boulders of rock fell from the roof as they ran down one corridor after another.
They came to another point where the corridor split into different directions. The
Doctor stopped. 'You had a map - give it to me.' The Master handed over the
map, his hand trembling with fear.

'Doctor!' It was Jo, running down one of the corridors towards them,
Caldwell behind her. 'Are you all right?'

'None of us is all right; said the Doctor, trying to read the map and
understand it, 'not while we're down here.'

'What's happening?' said Caldwell .
'I think the whole place is going to explode,' said the Doctor. He looked up

from the map. 'I think we may find an exit this way.' He grabbed Jo's arm and
started running again. As they left the spot, the rock wall fell in.

Two minutes later they came to a small opening in the rock face. It opened
on to a circular staircase cut in the rock. The Doctor stopped, again checking the
map. 'This could be it.'

'As long as those stairs lead up,' said Caldwell , 'that sounds good to me.
Come on!' He bounded up the steps, the others following. From behind they
could hear massive underground explosions. Caldwell got well ahead, and soon
they heard his voice from above. 'It's all right - we're in the open!' A moment
later they were all emerging from a hole in the rock. They had come up into the
open inside a devil's playground of huge rocks and boulders. It was still night, but
already the sun's rays were lighting the western sky. Even here the rock beneath
their feet was slightly trembling. 'We'd better get away from here,' said Caldwell .
'We've got to find the buggy. I reckon we go this way.' He walked off quickly,
the others following.



'So much for your interest in science,' said the Master, hurrying along
behind the Doctor and Jo. 'The most powerful machine ever created in the
Universe, and you let that fool Guardian destroy it all.'

'Science like that,' said the Doctor, 'is something we can all do without.'
Captain Dent stepped out from behind a boulder, his gun raised. 'Stop!'

He signalled with his free hand. IMC men carrying their high-powered guns
appeared from all sides. Dent turned to Caldwell . 'Thank you for leading them
to us. Now stand over there.'

Caldwell stood speechless. Jo knew by his expression that he had no
knowledge of the ambush. Resigned, he walked over to the spot indicated by
Captain Dent. The Master walked up to Dent.

'Congratulations, Captain Dent,' said the Master. 'You're just in time. Put
these people under arrest'

'Get backwith your accomplices,' orderedDent, and pointed his gun directly
at the Master.

'You don't understand,' the Master protested, 'I'm the official Adjudicator,
sent here by Earth Government.'

Morgan stepped forward, also armed. 'You're an impostor. Now get back.'
He pushed the Master back in line with the Doctor and Jo. Then he turned to the
IMC guards. 'All right, firing squad, step forward!'

Six IMC guards lined up in front of the Doctor, Jo, and the Master. They
raised their guns, ready for the order.

'You're insane,' said Caldwell , speaking to both Dent and Morgan. 'You're
murderers!'

Dent turned to him. ' Caldwell , if we didn't need you as our mining expert,
you'd be over there with them. So shut up!' He turned to the IMC guards. 'Take
aim!'

Suddenly Winton's voice called out from somewhere among the
surrounding boulders. 'Drop those guns, all of you!'

Dent turned and fired wildly. All around colonists rose up from behind the
boulders shooting at the IMC men. The Doctor grabbed Jo to pull her to safety.
The IMC men fired at any colonist's head they could see appearing over the
boulders. But they had to fire from crouching positions in the open, whereas the
colonists all had the protection of the ring of great rocks. Morgan fell dead as a
colonist's bullet hit him, and Captain Dent's gun was shot front his hand. Within
moments half the IMC men were either dead or wounded.

'Surrender,' called Winton. 'You will not be killed.'
'We give in,' Dent shouted. He called to what remained of the IMC guards.

'Throw down your guns!' The IMC men dropped their guns, and raised their
hands in surrender. Now, from all sides, colonists appeared from behind the
boulders. Winton ran forward to the Doctor and Jo. 'Are you two all right?'

Jo let Winton help her to her feet. 'But the spaceship,' she said, 'it exploded.'
'Captain Dent left one lookout to make sure no one should escape by leaving

the ship,' said Winton. 'I stayed behind and knocked him out. That let all the
others get out of the ship to safety before it took off.'

'Did you make it take off by remote-control?' asked the Doctor.



Winton shook his head. 'No. John Ashe went up with it. He insisted on
doing so. He gave his life for the sake of the rest of us.' He shrugged. 'Maybe
he was a bit crazy.'

'Perhaps,' said the Doctor, 'or a saint'
The Doctor's words were drowned by the thunderclap roar of a spaceship in

flight. Everyone looked up, and for a few seconds they saw theMaster's TARDIS
still looking like an Adjudicator's spaceship as it raced into the dawn sky.

'You let him get away!' said Jo.
'Ah, well,' said the Doctor, 'I suppose we all make mistakes sometimes.' He

turned to Winton again. 'What are you going to do about your prisoners?'
'Send them back to Earth,' Winton said; but his attention was still focussed

on the sky. 'Look, clouds!' He pointed to a formation of clouds that was sweeping
in from the west. 'There have never been clouds like that before,' he said, 'not
since we came here.'

The Doctor looked towards the oncoming clouds. 'You know something,'
he said to Jo, 'I think it's going to rain.'

21 Mission Completed

The colonists stood in a circle around the big grave they had dug a little way
from the main dome. Most of the IMC men had been safely locked up in their
spaceship, ready to be sent back to Earth. But Captain Dent, Caldwell, and three
guards were present at the ceremony to bury their own dead. Colonists and IMC
guards killed in the final battle were laid side by side in the grave. Gentle rain
fell from the clouds, soaking the colonist's poor clothing and making the dusty
soil turn into mud. When all the bodies were in the grave everybody turned to
Winton, expecting him now to speak as John Ashe had done before. He turned
to the Doctor. 'You say something,' he pleaded.

'No,' said the Doctor, 'it has to come from one of you. This is your land now.'
Winton turned to face the colonists and the IMC men who stood sullenly as

prisoners on the other side of the communal grave. 'I don't know how to make
speeches,' he said, 'but I can tell you how I feel. Our people didn't die for nothing.
To get anything worth having, like freedom, sometimes you have to fight, and
sometimes you have to die. So now it's up to us to make this colony work, for the
sake of the people who died.' He paused, then turned to the five IMC prisoners.
'Your people died for the wrong things, but I'm still sorry they got killed.' He
looked down into the grave. 'There's one man missing - John Ashe. We can't
bury him, but we can always remember him. He died so that we could live.'

No one spoke for a long time. They just stood, looking into the grave,
remembering. Then the first man picked up some of the muddy soil and threw it
into the grave, and each of the rest followed this ritual in turn.

Winton gave orders for the IMC prisoners to be escorted back to their
spaceship. But Caldwell stepped forward from the IMC group. 'You've lost some
good men,' he said to Winton. 'You're going to need more people to make this
colony a success. I'm a good engineer. How about it?'

'We're going to declare an independent republic,' saidWinton. 'Do you want
to be an outlaw?'



Caldwell smiled. 'I told you, I'm a good engineer. You're going to need
people like me.'

'All right. Let's go back to the dome and talk.' Winton led Caldwell away,
and the two men slowly walked back towards the main dome.

In the dome Mary Ashe, Jo, and some of the other younger women had
been busy preparing what food and drink they had for the others. As the colonists
returned from the burial the Doctor detected the beginning of a more hopeful
mood amongst them. He noticed that Winton and Caldwell were already
discussing how to improve the structure of the dome, where to dig deep wells
for more water. Then the men who had escorted the IMC prisoners to their ship
returned, and one of them made immediately for the Doctor. 'That blue box you
lost...' said the man, 'we found it on the way back here. It's in one of the old
Primitive ruins.' He drew a crude map to show the way.

The Doctor thanked the man and then hurried over to Jo. 'I know where the
TARDIS is. I think it's time to go.'

Jo was busy pouring tea for the others. 'But there are so many things to do
here, Doctor. Are we in a hurry?'

'Stay if you want to,' he said to her. 'But I'll never be able to explain it to
the Brigadier.'

Jo smiled. 'All right. I'll just say goodbye to everybody.'
The Doctor checked her. 'No. They'll all start asking where we came from

again. Let's just slip out while they're enjoying their victory.' He took Jo's hand
and together they went out of the dome. The rain had stopped now, and the sun
was shining brilliantly.

'Look!' said Jo in wonder. 'It's all green!'
As far as the eye could see the one-time impoverished land was shooting

up tiny blades of grass. Even the little shrub plants had grown new leaves.
'We'd better be quick getting to the TARDIS,' the Doctor laughed. 'The

speed things can grow here, we may find ourselves having to cut through a
jungle!'

They hurried away from the dome.
The Brigadier strode into the Doctor's laboratory at UNIT headquarters.

'Another false alarm,' he said as he entered. 'Theman they thought was theMaster
turned out to be the Spanish Ambassador...'

He stopped because he realised he was talking to himself. Not only that, but
the Doctor's precious police box was missing from its corner in the room.

'Doctor,' he called loudly, 'where are you?'
Even as he spoke he heard the strange heaving sound of the TARDIS

returning. In a moment the TARDIS materialised once more in its corner. The
door opened and the Doctor and Jo stepped out.

'What the devil are you two playing at?' said the Brigadier. 'Where have you
been? I told you I'd be back within the hour.'

'Within the hour?' said Jo. 'But we've been away for days!'
'For days ?' said the Brigadier in total disbelief. 'Miss Grant, I think you're

losing your sense of time.'
'On the contrary,' she said with a smile. 'I think I'm just beginning to gain it.'



Table of Contents
1 A Missing Secret
2 Into Time and Space
3 The Planet
4 The Monster
5 Starvation
6 The Survivor
7 The Robot
8 The Men from IMC
9 The Spy
10 The Claw
11 Face-to-Face
12 The Bomb
13 The Attack
14 The Adjudicator
15 Primitive City
16 The Ambush
17 Captain Dent Thinks Twice
18 The Master's TARDIS
19 The Return of Captain Dent
20 The Doomsday Weapon
21 Mission Completed