In this, the first adventure of his third 'incarnation', DOCTOR WHO, Liz
Shaw and the Brigadier grapple with the nightmarish invasion of the AUTONS
- living, giant-sized, plastic-modelled 'humans' with no hair and sightless eyes;
waxwork replicas and tailors' dummies whose murderous behaviour is directed
by the NESTENE

CONSCIOUSNESS - amalignant, squid-likemonster of cosmic proportions
and indescribably hideous appearance.



ISBN 0 426 11295 4
DOCTORWHO
AND THE



AUTON INVASION
Based on the BBC television serial Doctor Who and the Spearhead from Space

by Robert Holmes by arrangement with the British Broadcasting Corporation



TERRANCE DICKS

published by
The Paperback Division of
W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd



CONTENTS
1 Prologue: Exiled to Earth

2 The Mystery of the Meteorites
3 The Man from Space
4 The Faceless Kidnappers
5 The Hunting Auton
6 The Doctor Disappears
7 The Horror in the Factory
8 The Auton Attacks
9 The Creatures in the Waxworks
10 The Final Battle

A Target Book
Published in 1974
by the Paperback Division of W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd.
A Howard & Wyndham Company
44 Hill Street, London W1X 8LB

Novelisation copyright © Terrance Dicks
Original script copyright © Robert Holmes 1970
W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd illustrations copyright © 1974
'Doctor Who' series copyright © British Broadcasting Corporation 1970, 1974

Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Anchor Brendon Ltd, Tiptree, Essex

ISBN 0426 10313 0

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or
otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated without the publisher's
prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the
subsequent purchaser.



1
Prologue: Exiled to Earth

In the High Court of the Time Lords a trial was coming to its end. The accused,
a renegade Time Lord known as the Doctor, had already been found guilty. Now it
was time for the sentence.

The Doctor looked very out of place standing amongst the dignified Time Lords
in their long white robes. To begin with, he was quite a small man. He wore an ancient
black coat and a pair of check trousers. He had a gentle, rather comical face and a
shock of untidy black hair. But there was strength in that face, too, and keen
intelligence in the blue eyes.

A hush fell as the President of the Court rose, and began to speak. 'Doctor, you
have been found guilty of two serious offences against our laws. First, you stole a
TARDIS and used it to roam through Time and Space as you pleased.'

'Nonsense,' said the Doctor indignantly. 'I didn't steal it. Just borrowed it for a
while.'

The President ignored the interruption. 'More important, you have repeatedly
broken our most important law: interference in the affairs of other planets is a serious
crime.'

Again the Doctor interrupted: 'I not only admit my interference, I am proud of
it! You just observe the evil in the galaxies. I fight against it.'

'We have accepted your plea, Doctor, that there is evil in the Universe which
must be fought. You still have a part to play in that great struggle.'

At once the Doctor began to look hopeful. 'You mean you're going to let me go?'
'Not entirely. We have noted your interest in the planet Earth.
You have visited it many times. You must have special knowledge of that world

and its problems.'
'I suppose I have,' agreed the Doctor.

'You will be sent to Earth in the Twentieth Century Time Zone. You will remain
there for as long as we think proper. And for that time the secret of the TARDIS will
be taken from you.'

The Doctor was indignant. 'You can't condemn me to exile on one primitive
planet, in one particular time.'

The President's voice was cold. 'We can, and we do. That is the verdict of this
Court.'

A new thought struck the Doctor. 'Besides, I'm known on Earth already. It could
be most embarrassing for me.'

'Your appearance has changed before. It will change again.
That is part of your sentence.'
The Doctor continued to protest. 'You can't just change what I look like without

asking me!'
'You will have an opportunity to choose your new appearance,'
said the President patiently. 'Look!'
As if by magic, a huge screen appeared on one wall of the Court. Upon it the

Doctor saw a wide variety of faces and forms. At once the Doctor started to make



trouble. He rejected each one with the utmost scorn. 'Too thin. Too fat. Too young.
Too old. No, I certainly don't want to look like that, I can tell you.'

The President of the Court sighed. They were letting the fellow off lightly. He
ought to be humble and grateful, not kick up all this fuss. 'You are wasting time,
Doctor,' said the President. 'Since you refuse to take the decision, we shall take it for
you.'

The Doctor made no secret of his indignation.
'Well, I've got a right to decide what I'm going to look like,' he grumbled. 'They

attach a great deal of importance to these things on Earth. I mean, it's not my fault if
this is the best you can do, is it? I've never seen such a terrible looking bunch!'

Ignoring the Doctor's protests and complaints, the President sent a thought-
impulse to a fellow Time Lord who sat at a nearby control panel. The Time Lord's
fingers moved swiftly over the rows of buttons.

Immediately the Doctor was held in the grip of a force-field.
Unable to move, he felt the entire courtroom dissolve round him into a sort of

spinning blackness.

Sam Seeley moved through OxleyWoods like a rather tubby ghost. Sam was the
most expert poacher for miles around, and proud of it. Many a time he'd slipped by
within inches of a watching gamekeeper. Soundlessly he moved through the woods,
stopping from time to time to check his rabbit traps.

He mopped the sweat from his brow as he moved along. No business to be as
hot as this, not in October. Worse than a midsummer night it was. Seeley blamed it
on those atom-bombs.

Suddenly a fierce whizzing and hissing filled the air around him.
Terrified, Seeley dropped to the ground, muffling his head in his poacher's sack.

The terrifying noise continued. He heard soft thumping sounds, as if heavy objects
were burying themselves in the forest earth around him. At last there came silence.

Sam looked up cautiously. Within a few feet of his head the ground was smoking
gently. Cautiously Sam reached for a stick and started to scrape away the earth.Within
minutes he uncovered the top half of a buried sphere, roughly the size of a football.
The sphere was smooth, almost transparent. It pulsed and glowed with an angry green
light. It seemed somehow alive. Sam reached out to touch it, then pulled back his
hand. The thing was red hot.

Hurriedly, Sam replaced the earth over his find and moved away. He'd come
back again when it had cooled down, in daylight.

He set off for home.
But Sam Seeley was in for an even more terrifying experience as he crossed the

dark woods. Just as he came to a moonlit clearing, a strange wheezing and groaning
filled the air. Sam slipped behind a tree and froze as still as any rabbit.

Before his unbelieving gaze an old blue police box was appearing out of thin air.
It took shape, becoming solid as he watched. The weird groaning sound died away
and the box just stood there, looking sad and lost in the moonlit clearing. Slowly, the
door started to open.



Sam watched as a man came out of the police box.

Not daring to move, Samwatched as a man came out of the police box. A tall thin
man, with a deeply lined face and untidy white hair. Terrified as he was, Sam noticed
that the man's old black coat and check trousers were both far too small for him.

The man looked around as if in a daze. He looked straight at Sam, yet didn't
seem to see him. Frowning with concentration, the man produced a key and carefully
locked the door of the police box behind him. Then he took a couple of wobbly steps
and collapsed.

At this Sam Seeley's nerve finally broke. He crashed off through the woods,
running for home like a man chased by demons.

2



The Mystery of the Meteorites
Elizabeth Shaw was very angry indeed. It didn't help a bit that the tall army

officer sitting on the other side of his desk seemed to find her anger mildly amusing.
'Now see here, General,' she began angrily.
'Just "Brigadier", Miss Shaw. Brigadier Alastair Lethbridge-Stewart, at your

service.'
'Since you seem to be in charge of this silly James Bond outfit—'
Again the Brigadier interrupted, this time sounding rather hurt.
'I take it you're referring to UNIT—the United Nations Intelligence Taskforce?'
'I don't care what you call yourselves. I'm just trying to make it clear to you that

I'm not interested in playing secret agents with you.
I happen to have a very important research programme under way at Cambridge.'
The Brigadier looked through a file on the desk in front of him.
'I'm well aware of your scientific qualifications, Miss Shaw. An expert in

meteorites, degrees in physics, medicine and a dozen other subjects. Just the sort of all-
rounder I've been looking for!' The Brigadier sat back, stroking his clipped moustache
with an infuriatingly self-satisfied air.

Liz Shaw took a deep breath, and made a tremendous effort to control herself.
'You scoop me up from my laboratories in Cambridge, whizz me down here in a fast
car, and expect me to join some ridiculous spy outfit, just like that! Why me, for
Heaven's sake?'

The Brigadier said, 'We need your help, Miss Shaw. You'll find the laboratory
facilities here are really first class.'

'And what am I supposed to do with them? Invent a better kind of invisible ink?'

'I think you have rather a mistaken idea of our work here at UNIT. We're not
exactly spies, you know. If I could explain?'

Liz realised that, in spite of her anger, she was really rather curious about what
was going on. 'All right,' she said. 'Just what do you do—exactly?'

The Brigadier paused for a moment, obviously choosing his words with great
care. 'We deal with the odd—the unexplained.

We're prepared to tackle anything on Earth. Or even from beyond the Earth, if
necessary.'

Liz looked at him in amazement. To her astonishment he seemed quite serious.
'You mean alien invaders?' she said incredulously. 'Little blue men from Mars with
three heads?'

'Early this morning,' said the Brigadier, 'a shower of about fifty meteorites landed
in Essex.'

Liz's scientific curiosity was aroused at once. 'Landed? Most meteorites don't
even reach the Earth's surface. They burn up in the atmosphere.'

The Brigadier nodded. 'Exactly. But these didn't.'
'Were they exceptionally large?'
'Rather small if anything. And they came down through a funnel of thin, super-

heated air twenty miles in diameter—for which no one has been able to provide an
explanation.'

Liz frowned. 'Some kind of freak heat-wave?'



'Perhaps. But the temperature in that area was over twenty-eight Centigrade. A
few miles away there was ground-frost.'

'There must be an explanation,' said Liz thoughtfully. 'A natural one, I mean.'
She didn't sound very convincing, even to herself.

'I hope there is. I've cordoned off the area and I've got men searching now. But
we didn't find anything last time.' Liz looked up sharply. 'Last time?'

Grimly the Brigadier nodded. 'Six months ago, a smaller shower of meteorites,
five or six of them, landed in the same area.'

'That's impossible!' said Liz. 'The odds against two lots of meteorites landing in
the same place must be enormous.'

With some satisfaction the Brigadier looked at the girl in front of his desk. At
last she was beginning to realise the true seriousness of the situation.

Liz went on: 'In fact the odds are so high as to be scientifically unacceptable.' She
stood up and paced about the office, thinking aloud. 'So if we rule out coincidence,
there can be only one other explanation. Thosemeteorites—both showers—must have
been...'

Her voice tailed off as she couldn't bring herself to say the final words.
The Brigadier finished the sentence for her. 'That's right. The meteorite swarms

must have been directed. Deliberately aimed at this planet.'

In the reception hall of Ashbridge Cottage Hospital Captain Munro, of UNIT,
was arguing with an irate casualty officer.

Fortunately, Munro, a dark-haired, smoothly handsome young man, was
something of a diplomat. He was used to smoothing down awkward civilians, and
he answered all Doctor Henderson's objections with infuriating politeness. In the
background, two soldiers, Regular Army men on attachment to UNIT, waited
patiently, carrying between them a stretcher on which lay a still, blanket-covered
form.

'Dammit man,' said Doctor Henderson crossly, 'why didn't you take him to a
military hospital?'

Munro sighed. 'For one thing, sir, there isn't one in the area.
And for another...' Munro turned to the stretcher and pulled back the blanket. 'As

you can see, the chap's obviously a civilian.'
Henderson looked in amazement at the tall, thin figure on the stretcher. Coat and

trousers were both far too small, leaving bony wrists and ankles stretching out in a
scarecrow fashion. 'Not a very military figure, I agree,' admitted Doctor Henderson.
'All right, I suppose I'd better take a look at him.' He turned to the soldiers carrying
the stretcher. 'Take him through into Casualty, will you?

The porter will show you the way.' At a nod from Munro, the soldiers carried
the stretcher through the swing-doors into the casualty ward.

'You've no idea who he is, I suppose?' asked Henderson.
Munro shook his head. 'Haven't a clue, sir. There's no identification on him, I'm

afraid.'
Henderson heaved a sigh. 'You don't realise the amount of paperwork these cases

involve,' he said wearily. 'Reports to the police, memos to the Hospital Committee.
All in triplicate.'



Like any good soldier, Captain Munro knew when it was time to beat a retreat.
'You really have been awfully good sir,' he said smoothly. 'I'm sure the Brigadier will
be most grateful.' Munro looked at his watch. 'Which reminds me, I really ought to
'phone in a report. I wonder if I might...'

'Over there,' saidHenderson, nodding towards a 'phone booth in the corner. 'Mind
you, this chap's still your responsibility.'

Munro didn't commit himself. 'Thanks again, sir,' he said with his most charming
smile. 'Now, if you'll excuse me...'

Hastily Munro disappeared inside the 'phone booth.
Henderson, realising he'd been out-manoeuvred, turned and went through the

swing-doors after his new patient.

Back at UNIT H.Q., Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart was still trying to persuade
Liz Shaw to accept the unbelievable.

'Don't you see, Miss Shaw, it's just because everyone takes your attitude, refuses
to believe the evidence, that the Earth is in so much danger.'

'Why is Earth any more likely to be attacked now than at any time during the last
fifty thousand years?' said Liz obstinately.

'Isn't that obvious? Space probes, rocket launches, men on the moon...' The
Brigadier leaned forward, his voice urgent. 'We have drawn attention to ourselves,
Miss Shaw.'

Liz sank back into her chair. 'I'm sorry,' she said, 'but I just can't swallow it.
I admit I've got no explanation for your meteor swarms—but invasion from outer
space!'

For a moment the Brigadier was silent, then he seemed to come to a decision.
'And if I were to tell you that to my personal knowledge there have been two attempts
to conquer the planet Earth, both by intelligent life-forms from beyond this galaxy?'

All Liz could do was stare at him open-mouthed. He's cracking up, she thought
wildly. Over-work probably. Been reading too much science-fiction. The Brigadier
was still talking, quietly and calmly, apparently very much in control of his wits.

'UNIT was formed as a direct result of the first attempt. And I am proud to say
that it played a very large part in preventing the second invasion.'

'Well done,' said Liz faintly. She wondered if she ought to start heading towards
the door, before the Brigadier suddenly decided she was a Martian spy.

The Brigadier seemed lost in his memories. 'Though, of course, weweren't alone.
We had help. Very valuable help.' He looked up and smiled. 'To be perfectly honest,
Miss Shaw, you weren't my first choice for the post of UNIT's Scientific Adviser.'

Despite herself, Liz felt a bit resentful. 'Oh? And who was then?'
'A man called "the Doctor",' answered the Brigadier.
'Doctor?' said Liz. 'Doctor who?'
The Brigadier chuckled. 'Who indeed? I don't think he ever told us his name. But

he was the most brilliant scientist I have ever met. No disrespect, Miss Shaw.'
'So why didn't you get this mysterious genius to be your Scientific Adviser,

instead of practically kidnapping me?'
'Don't think I didn't try,' said the Brigadier ruefully.
'Unfortunately, he tends to appear and disappear as he pleases. I tried to get hold

of him when they decided we needed a resident scientist.



The Intelligence services of the entire world were unable to turn up any trace
of him.'

'So you decided to make do with me?'
'And a great success you'll make of it, I'm sure,' said the Brigadier. Liz couldn't

help smiling at the compliment. Despite his stiff militarymanner, there was something
very likable about the Brigadier.

The 'phone on the Brigadier's desk buzzed, and with a gesture of apology to Liz
the Brigadier picked it up.

'Munro here, sir,' said the voice at the other end. 'I'm at the Ashbridge Cottage
Hospital.'

'Have you found any trace of those meteorites?'
'No sir. All we've found so far is one unconscious civvie. I've just turned him

over to the local hospital.'
'Captain Munro,' said the Brigadier acidly, 'if you've nothing better to report than

the finding of a drunken tramp sleeping it off in the woods, I suggest you get off the
'phone and get on with the search.'

'The chap wasn't drunk sir. Half-dead more like it. And I don't think it was a
tramp. Weirdest thing you ever saw, sir. A police box slap in the middle of the woods,
and this fellow lying spark-out beside it.'

'A police box?' said the Brigadier. 'You did say a police box?'
His voice was suddenly eager and excited.
'That's right, sir,' saidMunro cheerfully. 'Suppose I ought to tell the police, really.

I mean they may want the thing back.'
The Brigadier's voice was brisk. 'On no account, Munro. I want an armed guard

on that police box right away. Nobody's to be allowed near it. Nobody! Is that clear?'
'Yes sir,' said Munro automatically. 'But I don't quite understand, sir...'
The Brigadier's voice cut in. 'This man you found. You say he's at the hospital?'
'In Casualty now sir. The Doctor's taking a look at him. The man seems to be

in a sort of a coma.'
'Right,' said the Brigadier crisply. 'Armed guard on him too, Munro. Nobody's

to talk to him till I arrive.'
'Very good sir,' said Munro, by now thoroughly puzzled.
'I'll come down right away. Oh—and Munro, I'll be bringing our new Scientific

Adviser with me. Meanwhile, keep the patrols searching.'
The Brigadier slammed down the 'phone and sat for a moment lost in thought.

'It can't be,' he said, almost to himself. 'But a police box! And it would be just like
him, turning up like that out of the blue.'

'Just like who?' said Liz, now thoroughly curious.
The Brigadier grinned. 'Come and see for yourself. I'd like you to come down

to Essex with me right away.'
'But why? What's going on?'
'That,' said the Brigadier, 'is exactly what I hope to find out. If my chaps do turn

up any of these meteorites you'll be able to do an on-the-spot examination. And I want
to see this man they've found for myself. Shall we go?'



Liz Shaw hesitated for a moment. She realised that this was her last chance to
insist on her rights, to refuse the ridiculous hush-hush job she was being offered and
return to the quiet, sane, sensible world of scientific research.

'Shall we go, Miss Shaw?' repeated the Brigadier.
Liz looked at him and saw the appeal behind the formal manner. Suddenly she

realised that the Brigadier really was worried, that he really did need her help. Why
me, she thought, why me?

There must be heaps of people better qualified.
But she also realised that she was now much too caught up in this mysterious

business of invading alien forces, intelligent meteorites and mysterious men with
police boxes, to draw back now.

If she did, she'd be torn with curiosity for the rest of her life. She got up and
strode to the door which the Brigadier was holding open for her. 'Come along then,
Brigadier,' she said briskly, 'what are we wasting time for?'

The Brigadier stood astonished as Liz strode past him and marched off down
the corridor. Then, deciding not for the first time that he would never understand the
ways of women, he hurried after her.

3



The Man from Space
In a small private room, Ashbridge Cottage Hospital's latest arrival lay

motionless on the bed. Henderson stood over him, his face a picture of astonishment.
He'd expected all along that the new arrival would mean trouble. But not this kind of
trouble. Hovering as it seemed between life and death, the new patient was showing
reflexes and reactions that Henderson had never encountered before.

Henderson looked up eagerly as a nurse entered with a batch of X-ray plates.
Surely these would throw some light on things. The nurse looked at the still figure
on the bed. 'How is he, Doctor?'

Henderson turned away to look at the X-rays. 'I only wish I knew,' he said
honestly. The nurse leaned over the patient, automatically smoothing the pillows and
straightening the sheets.

The man on the bed was quiet and still, scarcely breathing. She studied the still
features for a moment. It was a strange face.

Sometimes it seemed handsome and dignified, sometimes quizzical, almost
comic. The seams and wrinkles, the shock of almost white hair should have made it
an old face, yet somehow there was a strong impression of energy and youth.

Suddenly the nurse drew back in amazement as two very blue eyes flicked open,
and studied her with interest. Then solemnly one of them winked. Both eyes closed
and the man seemed to subside into his coma.

'Nurse!' Henderson's voice made her jump. It was cold with anger. 'Would you
mind coming over here, please?'

The nurse trembled. Like all the other nurses in the hospital, she was terrified
of Henderson and his sharp tongue. What could be wrong now, she thought. Maybe
those idiots in radiology had sent up the wrong plates. Whatever it was, she'd be the
one to get the blame.

Inwardly quaking, she crossed to where Henderson was examining the X-rays
on a lighted stand. 'Is there anything wrong, Doctor?' she said, trying to keep her voice
calm.

Henderson pointed to the X-ray. 'You have, I take it, studied the human anatomy
as part of your training?'

The nurse sighed. 'Of course, Doctor.'
Henderson jabbed a quivering finger at the X-ray plate. 'Then perhaps you would

be kind enough to tell me what that is?'
She followed the direction of the finger. 'It's the patient's heart, Doctor.'
Henderson's finger moved across to the other side of the plate.
'Then what's this, then, eh? What's this?' By now he was so angry that his voice

came out only as a sort of strangulated shriek.
The nurse, now completely terrorised, leaned forward and peered nervously at

the X-ray. Then she drew a deep breath. 'It appears to be another heart, sir.'
'Exactly,' said Henderson grimly. 'Another heart. And that, as we know, is

impossible, isn't it, nurse? Now then, which of your jolly medical student friends is
responsible for this little prank, eh?'

The nurse struggled to control her quavering voice. 'I don't know, Doctor,
honestly. All I did was wait till the plates were ready and bring them back to you.'



Henderson studied her narrowly and saw that she was much too terrified to be
relating anything except the truth. As always, he regretted his quick temper. 'All right,'
he said gruffly, 'probably wasn't your fault. But someone in that X-ray Department is
playing games with me, and I'm going to find out who it is.' He was about to stride
from the room when the internal 'phone bleeped. The nurse picked it up. An angry
voice said in her ear: 'This is Lomax.

Pathology Lab. Is Doctor Henderson there?'
The nurse almost dropped the 'phone from pure terror. If there was anyone more

feared than Doctor Henderson, it was old Doctor Lomax in Pathology. Silently she
handed the 'phone to Doctor Henderson. He took it and said, 'Doctor Henderson.
Well?'

The fierce Scottish voice jabbed at his eardrums. 'No, Doctor Henderson, it's no'
well at all. Not when ye've the time to play wee stupid tricks on a busy man like me.'

Henderson's bad temper returned full blast. He and Lomax were old enemies.
'What the blazes are you talking about?'

'I am talking, Doctor Henderson, about the sample of blood ye've just sent us for
cross matching. Ye admit ye sent the sample?'

'Of course I did. It's routine. You know that. What's the matter with it?'
The voice on the 'phone was airily sarcastic. 'Oh nothing, Doctor Henderson,

nothing. Except that it's not human blood, as you very well know.'
Henderson said angrily. 'What do youmean, not human? I took it from the patient

myself.'
'It is not human blood,' said Lomax emphatically. 'The platelet stickiness is quite

different and it corresponds to no known human blood-type.'
'Now you listen to me, Doctor Lomax. I took that blood sample from an adult

male patient who is lying on the bed in front of me now. You tell me it's not human.
His X-ray tells me he's got two hearts. Now I don't know whether that makes me a
doctor, a vet or a raving lunatic, but as far as I'm concerned those are the facts.'

Henderson slammed down the 'phone, feeling considerably better for his
outburst. He turned to the nurse, who braced herself for another blast, and was
astonished when Henderson said gently, 'It seems I owe you an apology, nurse.' He
crossed to the bed and looked down at the sleeping man. 'Well, whoever or whatever
you are, old chap, you're still a patient, and it's my job to look after you.'

Henderson turned to the nurse with a worried smile. 'The only thing is—I haven't
the faintest idea where to start.'

They both looked down at the man on the bed. The nurse said,
'I thought he was coming round a moment ago, but he seems to have...'
She stopped as the man on the bed opened his eyes again. This time he was

frowning. He said clearly, 'My lord, I wish to protest in the strongest terms... the
sentence is... I insist on my rights...'

The voice tailed away and the patient slept again. In the corridor outside,Mullins,
the hospital porter, abandoned a half-mopped floor and moved off towards the foyer.
No one paid Mullins any attention as he slipped across the foyer and into the 'phone
booth.

He was a seedy little man, easy to ignore. Quickly he dialled the local paper,
hands trembling with excitement. In a moment he was speaking to one of the junior
reporters.



'Listen, I've got something for you.'

In a clump of bushes at the edge of Oxley Woods, Sam Seeley crouched as
motionless as one of the rabbits he had so often poached.

In the distance he could hear the crashing of heavily booted feet, the sound of
shouted orders as the army patrols called to each other on their search.

With military precision the soldiers had divided the woods into sections, and
were methodically combing them, one by one. The woods were thick and dark, the
ground between the trees heavily overgrown with gorse and bracken. The search was
taking a long time. So far they had found nothing. They certainly hadn't found Sam
Seeley, who slipped through the patrols at will, sometimes passing within a few feet
of them.

The sounds of search came nearer. Sam peered through a gap in the bushes and
saw a three-man patrol approaching. Two of the soldiers were carrying some kind of
mine-detector, while the third, a corporal, was directing their search. Sam grinned to
himself. He knew what they were looking for. What's more, he knew where to find it.

After his terrifying experience in the woods, the previous night, Sam had been
glad to slip back to his little cottage and creep into bed. His wife, Meg, pretended to
be asleep as he crept into bed beside her. She knew well enough where he'd been, but
preferred not to show it. Although she would never admit that Sam was a poacher,
she'd no objection to the plump rabbits or partridges that appeared on the kitchen table
from time to time, some to go into her stewpot, some to be sold by Sam down at the
village pub.

Sam had been tossing and turning in bed, thinking over the things he'd seen.
The glowing green sphere of the meteorite, the man who'd appeared by magic. Who
should he tell? Above all, how could he turn a profit out of it all?

He had been wakened from an uneasy sleep just a few hours after dawn by the
rumble of lorries past his window. Slipping out of bed and drawing back the curtain,
he had seen the troops go by, lorry-load after lorry-load of grim silent men, clutching
rifles.

As he crouched in the bushes, watching the patrol move away past him, Sam
became more and more convinced that he was doing the right thing. Anything that
was worth so much trouble must also be worth a lot of money. Let the soldier boys
crash round the woods as much as they liked. Then, when they were desperate, they'd
be ready to pay and pay well for the thing he'd found. Some piece of Government
equipment, he reckoned. Something they'd shot up in the air that hadn't come down
where it was meant to. Well, they could have their nice green ball back. But not for
nothing.

Meanwhile he'd better get his find to a safe place, just in case one of those soldiers
happened to get lucky. The patrol was almost out of sight now. Sam slipped into the
woods, making for the clearing where he'd found the glowing ball. This time there
was a shovel and a sheet of the wife's new-fangled kitchen foil in the sack he carried.

Retracing his steps of last night, Sam skirted the edge of the clearing where
the strange blue box had appeared. The man had gone but the box was still there.
Now, in the daylight, he could see that it was nothing more than an old blue police
box. A sentry stood guarding it. He was young and nervous looking. In his curiosity
Sam forgot to watch his footing and stepped into a crackly patch of dry bracken.
Immediately the sentry's rifle swung round.



'Halt. Who goes there? Answer, or I fire!' Sam dropped to the ground and froze.
The sentry's voice was high-pitched with nerves.

The sentry swung his rifle around, covering the thick forest. Except for some
distant bird song, the silence was complete. Shaking his head at his own nervousness,
the sentry shouldered his rifle, went back to guarding the police box. How much
longer were they going to leave him here, anyway? What was the point of guarding
a police box that some idiot had stolen and carried out here?

In the trees, Sam heaved a sigh of relief and slipped away.
After a narrow shave with another patrol—the soldier was having a crafty doze

and Sam almost stepped on him—he found himself back in the part of the woods
where he'd made his find. To most people that bit of wood looked like any other, but
to Sam it was as easily

identifiable as if there'd been street names and signposts. That oddly shaped
branch there, that little fold of land there, little thorn bush here... Sam lined up his
landmarks, produced his spade and began to dig.

Sam reached out and touched the globe cautiously.

In a few moments the blade of the shovel touched something hard and smooth.
Sam began to dig cautiously round the sphere.

Whatever it was, he didn't want to damage it. Soon the green globe was fully
uncovered. It still pulsated, but it seemed quieter, more subdued, in the daylight. Sam
reached out and touched it cautiously.

Still warm, but none of the searing heat of the night before. He produced his
sheet of kitchen foil and began to wrap up his find.

In the hospital bed the mysterious new patient stirred. His eyes shot open.
Suddenly he sat bolt upright in the bed, looking keenly around him. Apart from
himself, the room was empty. He frowned and rubbed his chin as if he'd forgotten
something very important.

Suddenly he lurched forward, face down across the bed, and began to grope
underneath it. It was in this position that the nurse found him when she re-entered
the room.



Shocked, she rushed forward, grabbed him by the shoulders and pushed him
back onto the bed.

'You really mustn't, you know,' she said firmly. 'You're not strong enough to get
up yet.'

The patient struggled feebly, but it was no use. 'Shoes,' he said with sudden
clarity, 'must find my shoes.'

The nurse ignored him. With professional skill she settled him back into the bed
and tucked him in. 'You don't need your shoes,' she said brightly, 'because you're not
going anywhere. Now try to rest.'

The man on the bed regarded her with evident disgust.
'Madam,' he said with old-fashioned politeness, 'I really must ask you... must ask

you...' The voice became faint and he sunk back into sleep.
The nurse was smoothing his pillows and straightening the coverlet as Doctor

Henderson entered. 'Any change?'
'He recovered consciousness, Doctor, just for a few minutes.
He tried to get up but I managed to calm him.'
'Did he say anything?'
'Not really. He seemed to be worried about his shoes.'
Henderson shook his head as he looked down at the patient.
The man was sleeping calmly now, though a faint frown still wrinkled his

forehead. 'Probably still irrational, poor chap.Well, some bigwig fromUNIT's coming
down to see him. Perhaps he'll know what to make of you,' said Henderson to the
sleeping man,

'because I'm blowed if I do.'

At this particular moment the bigwig from UNIT, accompanied by a rather
amused Liz Shaw, was trying to push his way politely but firmly through a crowd
of eagerly inquisitive newspapermen and photographers in the hospital entrance hall.
The Brigadier's moustache twitched with disgust as a particularly keen photographer
shot off a flash-bulb right under his nose. As the leader of a supposedly secret
organisation, the Brigadier felt it was all wrong to be photographed for the
newspapers, and he had no idea how all these people had turned up. He only knew
that they were there, and he very much wished that they weren't.

A tall man pushed his way to the front of the crowd.
'Wagstaffe, sir, Defence Correspondent of The Daily Post.'
A second reporter cut in—'Can you give us a statement, sir?'
The Brigadier's tone was not encouraging. 'What about?'
Wagstaffe was courteous, but persistent. 'What's UNIT doing down here, sir? Is

it true you've got some kind of man from space in there?'
'Nonsense,' said the Brigadier firmly. 'I don't know where you chaps get these

stories from.'
'Can we have some pictures of him, sir?' said the photographer, getting another

quick shot of the Brigadier meanwhile.
'Certainly not.'
'Why not, sir? Can we tell the readers they'd be too horrible to publish?' said one

of the reporters hopefully. 'Have you got some kind of monster in there, sir?'



'Ridiculous,' said the Brigadier, 'I assure you there is no monster and no story for
you, either, so you might as well go home.'

Wagstaffe returned to the attack. 'Then why are you here, sir?
Why have your men cordoned off the whole of Oxley Woods? What are they

searching for?' The questions came thick and fast now, from all the others. 'What about
the freak heat-wave last night?' 'And the meteorite shower. Is there some connection?'
'What about this man from space? Is it true he's not really human?' 'Where did you
find him? Have you found his space-ship yet?' 'Who's the young lady, sir?

Has she come to identify the man?'
It was many years since the Brigadier had been on a barrack square, but his voice

could still carry the arresting sharpness of command.
'One moment, gentlemen, if you please!' A rather startled silence fell. The

Brigadier looked round. Beneath his assured exterior his mind was frantically
searching for a plausible story. Oddly enough, he hit upon the same idea that Sam
Seeley had worked out for himself in the woods. 'All I can tell you at the moment
is this.

Last night some top secret Government equipment, something to do with the
space programme, descended off-course and landed in this area. My men are
searching for the fragments, if any, now.' Pretty convincing, that, thought the
Brigadier, might almost be true. He gave himself a mental pat on the back. Indicating
Liz Shaw, he said,

'This is our Scientific Adviser. She's come to help identify anything we turn up.'
'Then what about this mystery man in there?' Wagstaffe again, not to be easily

put off.
The Brigadier thought fast. 'In there, gentlemen, is some unfortunate civilian

who was found unconscious in the woods early this morning. We hope he may have
seen the device land. He may even be able to tell us where it is.'

'And that's really all there is to it, sir?'
'That's all I can tell at the moment,' said the Brigadier, rather neatly avoiding a

direct lie. 'Now if you'll excuse me?'
He strode through the swing-doors into Casualty, Liz Shaw following behind.

The Brigadier would have been less pleased with himself if he could have known that
his flight-of-fancy had endangered the life of the man he had come to see.

As the Brigadier was beginning his explanation, a man had entered unobserved.
He was standing now at the back of the crowd.

The man was middle-aged, immaculately dressed, with regular, handsome
features. He might have been a distinguished surgeon, or a wealthy visitor for one of
the hospital patients.

One of the reporters glanced casually at him, wondering who he was. Then the
reporter looked again. There was something about this man, something odd. The
clothes were too immaculate, the handsome features too calm and regular. He looks
like a wax dummy, thought the reporter uneasily. Like a waxwork come to life.

Sensing that he was being stared at, the new arrival looked up.
The reporter recoiled physically, as if struck by a sudden blow. The stranger's

eyes were staring at him, fiercely alive, almost glowing with the light of an
intelligence that seemed somehow—alien. Those eyes scorched the reporter for a
moment, then the man turned away, strode across the foyer, making as if to follow
the Brigadier.



Mullins, the hospital porter, rather aghast at the results of his
'phone call, had been placed on guard by the door. He was being extra efficient,

as if trying to make up for his previous indiscretion.

As the stranger tried to follow the Brigadier, Mullins barred his way.
'Can't go in there sir, sorry. No one allowed in there at all.' The stranger raised

those burning eyes and Mullins too, recoiled. But he stood firm.
'No use you glaring at me like that, mate,' he said, his voice quavering a little.

'You can't go in there and that's that. You want me to call the soldiers?'
Much to Mullins' relief the man turned on his heel and strode swiftly away,

making for the telephone in the corner. Mullins mopped his brow and swore that he'd
never call the papers again.

The stranger stepped beneath the acoustic hood and stood motionless. There was
no expression on the blank face. The burning eyes stared into the distance, the head
was cocked a little as if listening. The smooth white hands made no move to pick
up the

'phone. The man simply stood there, completely motionless. Like a waxwork...

4



The Faceless Kidnappers
Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart strode along the hospital corridor, Liz Shaw

struggling to keep up with him. Captain Munro came hurriedly to meet him.
'Where the blazes did that lot come from?' snapped the Brigadier, gesturing

behind him.
'No idea sir,' said Munro. 'They just appeared like swallows in the spring.' He

looked enquiringly at Liz, who gave him a friendly smile.
The Brigadier grunted. 'Miss Shaw, this is Jimmy Munro, my number two.'

Munro nodded a greeting and fell into step beside them.
'Got that police box under guard?' said the Brigadier.
'Yes sir. The sentry's got orders to let no one near it.'
'This man we're going to see,' said Liz. 'I gather you think he may be your

mysterious Doctor?'
'I'm certain of it, Miss Shaw.'
'Why? Because of the police box?'
'Just so,' said the Brigadier. 'Because of the police box.'
'Here we are, sir,' said Munro. 'They've put him in a private room.' A sentry was

guarding the door. The Brigadier acknowledged his salute and strode into the room.
Doctor Henderson stood waiting by his bed. Nothing could be seen of the bed's

occupant, who had wriggled, down under the covers. Briefly Munro made the
necessary introductions.

'I understand you may be able to cast some light on our mystery man, Brigadier?'
said Henderson. The Brigadier nodded. 'In that case,' Henderson went on, 'I'd be very
grateful for some explanation of his physical make-up.'

Liz looked puzzled. 'How do you mean?'
'His whole cardio-vascular system is different from anything I've ever

encountered. He appears to have two hearts. Moreover, his blood belongs to no known
human type.'

Lethbridge-Stewart nodded, obviously delighted by this news.
'Splendid. That sounds exactly like the Doctor.' He peered at the little that could

be seen of the patient. 'Hair was black, though, as I remember. Could be shock, I
suppose.'

Cautiously the Brigadier drew back the sheet from the face of the man on the
bed. He peered for a moment, then straightened up, his face a study in disappointment.

Liz said, 'Well? Do you know him?'
The Brigadier shook his head sadly. 'The man's a complete stranger.'
'You're sure?' asked Henderson.
'Of course I'm sure.' Disappointment made the Brigadier speak sharply. He

looked down again at the sleeper. 'Never seen the feller before in my life.'
The eyes of the man on the bed opened wide, staring straight at the Brigadier. A

sudden charming smile spread over his face.
'Lethbridge-Stewart, my dear fellow. How nice to see you again!'
'You may not know him, sir' said Munro, 'but he seems to know you all right.'
Baffled, the Brigadier stared at the patient, who seemed to be drifting off to sleep

again.



'But he can't do. It's impossible.' The Brigadier bent over the bed and prodded
the sleeper awake.

'Steady on, Brigadier,' protested Doctor Henderson. 'He's still very weak, you
know.'

But the Brigadier ignored him. 'Look here, my man, can you hear me? Who are
you?'

The eyes of the man opened wide, staring straight at the Brigadier.

The man opened his eyes indignantly. 'Don't be silly, my dear chap. You know
who I am. I'm the Doctor.'

'You most certainly are not!'
'Come, come now, old chap. Remember the Yeti? And the Cybermen? You can't

have forgotten already.' And struggling to a sitting position, the Doctor looked at his
old friend in astonishment.

'Don't you recognise me?' he asked plaintively.
'I am quite positive that we have never met before.'
The Doctor passed his hand over his face in puzzlement. It didn't feel right. 'Oh

dear,' he said. 'You really are sure? I can't have changed that much.' He seemed to
brace himself, then asked, 'I wonder if I might borrow a mirror?'

At a nod from the Brigadier, Henderson produced a mirror from the bedside
locker and handed it over. The Doctor looked into it. The face of a stranger was
looking back at him.

The Doctor's mind reeled under the sudden shock. Fragments of the recent past
flashed disjointedly before his eyes. His capture by the Time Lords. The trial. The
faces of Jamie and Zoe as they said goodbye. The Doctor looked round him wildly.
He saw the young army officer, the girl, the doctor, Lethbridge-Stewart peering at
him suspiciously. Suddenly their faces began to spin round him, like the faces they'd
offered him to choose from at the trial. He made an unsuccessful attempt to stand up,
then collapsed backwards upon the bed.

The Brigadier made an attempt to re-awaken him, but Henderson stepped firmly
between them.

'Whoever or whatever this man is, Brigadier, he's still my patient. He's tired and
weak and he needs rest.'



The Brigadier rubbed his chin. 'Extraordinary business. Quite extraordinary.' He
came to a decision. 'When will this man be well enough to travel?'

Henderson shrugged. 'Hard to say at the moment.'
The Brigadier turned to Munro. 'As soon as he's well enough, I want him

transferred to the sick-bay at UNIT H.Q. Meanwhile, carry on with the search!'
'Very good, sir,' said Munro. They moved away from the bed.
'And keep that police box under guard. I'll send a lorry with some lifting tackle

down to bring it back to H.Q.' The Brigadier looked again at the man on the bed and
shook his head. 'I don't know why this chap should choose to impersonate the Doctor.
But I intend to find out.'

'Er—yes, sir. Quite, sir,' said Munro, who was now completely baffled.
The Brigadier turned to the equally puzzled Liz. 'My apologies, Miss Shaw, we

seem to have had a wasted journey.
Doctor Henderson, is there another way out of this building?'
Henderson looked up from his patient. 'Turn left instead of right and you can get

out through the kitchens.'
'Thank you, Doctor Henderson. I'll be in touch. Miss Shaw, Captain Munro.' The

Brigadier strode briskly from the room, Liz and Munro following. Liz didn't resent
the brusqueness of his tone. She sensed just how disappointed the Brigadier had been
by his failure to meet his old friend, the Doctor.

In the entrance hall of the hospital, things were very much calmer. Most of the
pressmen had gone, accepting the Brigadier's statement and making the best of it.
Mislaid Government space equipment wasn't as good a story as a monster fromMars,
but it was better than nothing. Only Wagstaffe was still hanging about and he wasn't
quite sure himself why he bothered.

Suddenly he heard the sound of a car. He reached the hospital steps just in time
to see the UNIT car drawing away. If the Brigadier's got nothing to hide, why is he
sneaking out the back way, thought Wagstaffe irritably. He wandered across to the
door to Casualty, whereMullins was still on guard. 'Any chance of a word with Doctor
Henderson?'

Mullins shook his head. 'No use asking me. You can wait if you like.'
'Never mind. I'll ring the office and then get back.' He was moving towards the

'phone when Mullins' voice stopped him.
'Somebody's there. Been there ages, he has.'
Wagstaffe looked across to the booth. Beneath the hood he could we the figure

of a man standing motionless.
'Know who he is, do you?' asked Mullins. 'Funny bloke. Eyes that go right

through you.'
Wagstaffe shook his head. 'Never seen him before. He's not one of the regular

boys. You say he's been there quite a while?'
Mullins nodded. 'Ever since that Brigadier came through.'
Wagstaffe moved towards the 'phone booth. 'Better winkle him out, then, hadn't

we?'
'Rather you than me,' said Mullins.
Wagstaffe crossed to the booth and tapped his arm.
'Think you could get a move on, old chap?' he said pleasantly.
'You see I've got a rather urgent story to 'phone in and...'



His voice tailed away as the man in the booth swung round on him. Like Mullins
before him, Wagstaffe recoiled from the fierce impact of those glaring eyes. He tried
to go on.

'I mean, you have been in there quite a while and...' The man in the booth brushed
past him, walked across the entrance hall and disappeared through the exit doors.

Wagstaffe looked at the telephone. It was still on its rest. He hadn't been using
the 'phone at all, he thought. All that time he had just been standing there. Like a
waxwork.

'Shoes,' said the Doctor feebly. 'It's most important. Must have my shoes.'
The nurse smiled placidly as she took his pulse.
'I've already told you,' she said, as if to a child, 'you don't need your shoes because

you're not going anywhere.'
That's all you know, thought the Doctor to himself. He slumped back on the

pillows as Doctor Henderson entered.
'How is he, nurse?'
'He seems well enough, Doctor. But his pulse is pretty peculiar. She handed

Henderson the graph. He studied it gloomily.

Wagstaffe recoiled from the fierce impact of those glaring eyes.



'Ten a minute! Still, for all we know that might be normal for him. Heartbeat?'
'Strong and steady, sir. Both of them.'
Henderson sighed and bent over the Doctor. He spoke with professional

cheerfulness. 'Hullo, old chap. How are we feeling now?'
'Shoes,' said the Doctor again.
Henderson turned to the nurse. 'Poor chap's mind seems to be wandering.'

'He seems to be worried about his shoes. I think he believes they've been stolen.'
'Well, if he's worried about them, he'd better have 'em. Might as well humour

the poor fellow.'
The nurse fished under the bed and produced a rather battered pair of elastic-

sided boots. Immediately, the Doctor reached forward, snatched them from her and
clasped them protectively to his chest.

He sank back on the bed, a blissful smile on his face, and seemed to go to sleep.
Henderson gave him a worried look. 'I wonder if there's any brain damage. I'll

run some tests on him as soon as he comes out of it.'
The nurse looked at her peculiar patient. 'He's certainly been acting very

erratically.'
Henderson frowned. 'Think I'll test his blood pressure while I'm here. Get the

apparatus, will you please, nurse?'
As the nurse left the room Henderson checked the charts on the end of the

Doctor's bed, shaking his head in sheer disbelief. How could you treat a patient whose
anatomy seemed to contradict all the known laws of medicine? Those incredible X-
rays!

On the bed, the Doctor opened his eyes cautiously. Henderson, brooding over the
papers, was turned away from him. The Doctor up-ended his shoes, first one, then the
other. From the second there dropped a key. With a sigh of relief, the Doctor closed
his eyes, the key clasped tightly in his hand.

For a minute or two the little room was silent. The Doctor seemed to doze.
Henderson was immersed in the charts. Neither of them seemed to notice when two
men, one of them pushing a wheel-chair, slipped silently into the room.

Henderson, vaguely aware that someone was there, glanced up absently,
expecting to see his returning nurse. He drew back in horror at the sight of a giant
figure looming over him. He opened his mouth to shout, but an enormous hand
swatted him to the floor as easily as if he had been a fly. A second before he sank into
unconsciousness, Doctor Henderson noticed something peculiarly horrible about that
hand. It was completely smooth and white, and there were no fingernails.

The two huge figures moved swiftly and efficiently. The Doctor was hoisted
effortlessly into the wheel-chair. Surgical tape was slapped as a gag over his mouth.
A blanket from the bed was bundled round his nightshirted form and he was wheeled
from the room. The entire kidnapping had taken place in a matter of seconds.

On the floor, Henderson groaned and stirred, struggling slowly to his feet. Feebly
he shouted for help.

The two massive figures pushed the wheel-chair with its silent burden along the
corridor. By a side door a man stood waiting. He was immaculately dressed, with
handsome regular features. He stood completely still, like a waxwork. The only alive
thing about him was his fiercely glowing, burning eyes.



As the two giants with the wheel-chair appeared, he opened a small side door
leading to a yard. The two men wheeled the chair through the doorway and the third
man hurried after them into the hospital yard.

The little party moved swiftly and silently round the corner. At the top of the
steep hospital drive stood a small plain van, the back doors already open. The Doctor
in his wheel-chair was pushed rapidly up to the van.

Suddenly the Doctor sprang into life. Gripping the sides of the wheel-chair, he
gave a tremendous shove with both feet against the back of the van. The wheel-chair
shot rapidly between the two kidnappers and landed backwards in a hedge. Adroitly
the Doctor spun it round, and with another tremendous shove launched himself down
the steep hospital drive. Gathering speed, he raced down the drive at a tremendous
rate.

His kidnappers made as if to follow him, then at a sign from their leader leaped
into the van. The leader took the wheel and started turning the van in order to pursue
the Doctor.

Doctor Henderson staggered through the hospital foyer, ignoring the astonished
receptionist and reeled out onto the steps. He called hoarsely, 'There they are. Stop
them! Stop them!'

At this precise moment. Captain Munro drove up in a UNIT
jeep. He saw Henderson collapsing on the front steps, the Doctor disappearing

through the main gates in a wheel-chair, and two very odd looking men clambering
into a van driven by a third. The van went off in pursuit of the Doctor.

Immediately Munro swung the jeep round in a tight circle and set off after the
van. Driving one-handed he lugged out his service revolver and tried a few shots at
the tyres, but with no luck. Tossing the revolver on the seat, he concentrated on his
driving.

The Doctor meanwhile was whizzing at tremendous speed down the short, steep
hill that led to the hospital He was very much aware of the pursuing van gaining on
him rapidly. It was almost upon him when he spotted a gap in the hedge that bordered
the hill. A tiny, narrow track led deep into Oxley Woods. The wheel-chair lurched
onto its two side wheels and almost overbalanced as the Doctor flung it into a right-
angled turn that sent him rocketing down the path.



The Doctor whizzed at tremendous speed down the short, steep hill.

The kidnappers' van skidded to a halt at the head of the narrow track. The two
huge, silent men jumped out, obviously intending to follow the Doctor on foot.

Then behind them they heard the sound of the UNIT jeep coming after them.
As if in obedience to some unspoken command, the men jumped in the van, which
accelerated off down the road.

Munro skidded his jeep to a halt at the head of the track.
Grabbing his revolver, he shot again at the tyres. Again he missed, and the van

disappeared out of sight round the corner of the road. For a moment Munro paused,
wondering if he should give chase. He glanced down the little track. A few hundred
yards down it he could see the wheel-chair. It lay on its side, one wheel still spinning.
In front of the chair there seemed to be a huddled form.Munro decided that recovering
the victimwas more important then catching the kidnappers, and set off running down
the track.

But when he got to the chair he realised that what he had taken for the Doctor's
body was no more than a pile of blankets. Munro paused, listening. Faintly he could
hear movement going away from him deeper into the woods.

'Hey, come back,' he called. 'It's all right, you're safe now.'
The Doctor was running at full speed through the tangled woods, ignoring the

branches that lashed at his face and body.
Totally confused by the sudden flurry of events, there was only one thought in

his mind. Like a hunted animal making instinctively for its lair, he wanted desperately
to reach the safety of the TARDIS.

In one hand he clutched the reassuring shape of the little key that he'd hidden in
his shoe. With the other he scrabbled ineffectively at the plaster over his mouth. He
paused for a second to try to get it off. Then behind him he heard shouting and the
distant sounds of pursuit. The Doctor decided that running was more important than
talking and resumed his flight. He had no way of telling that his pursuer was Munro,
who wanted only to help him.

On the other side of the woods, Corporal Forbes and his patrol were running too.
Forbes had heard the distant sounds of shooting from the hospital and had instinctively
led his men in the direction of the trouble. In different parts of the woods, other patrols
were converging on the Doctor.

The young sentry left guarding the TARDIS could hear the noises too. He'd been
on duty in this gloomy, sinister forest since early dawn. He was cold, tired, hungry and
ready to panic. The crack of the shots fromMunro's revolver had already alarmed him.
Now from all round seemed to come shouts and the sound of men crashing through
the woods. He spun round nervously from side to side, trying to cover every direction
at once.

Suddenly he caught a glimpse through the trees of a ghostly white figure bearing
down upon him. He brought his rifle to his shoulder.

'Halt,' he called in a cracked voice. 'Halt or I fire!' Hemmed in by the sound of
the UNIT patrols moving in all round him, the Doctor suddenly caught a glimpse of
the square blue shape of the TARDIS through the trees. Summoning up the last of
his strength, the Doctor flung himself towards it in a last desperate sprint. As he burst
from the bushes surrounding the clearing, he saw to his horror the soldier with his rifle



aimed straight at him. The Doctor tried to shout but the tape was still over his mouth.
There was the crack of the rifle shot, a searing pain in his head and then blackness.
The Doctor spun round and crumpled to the ground.

Seconds later Forbes and his patrol reached the clearing.
'I had to shoot, Corp,' babbled the sentry. 'He attacked me.
Came straight at me!' Forbes looked at the still figure of the Doctor.
'Attacked you, did he? An unarmed man, in a hospital nightshirt?'
'I challenged him, Corporal, honestly. He didn't answer.'
Forbes knelt and examined the Doctor, turning him gently over onto his back.

'He couldn't answer. Somebody's taped his mouth up.'
He looked at the Doctor's white face. A smear of blood was startlingly red on

the forehead. Forbes felt for a pulse in the neck. He could feel nothing.
Munro ran up to the clearing, saw the group of soldiers gathered round the

motionless Doctor.
'What's happened, Corporal? Is the man all right?'
Forbes looked up. 'No sir. I think he's dead.'

5



The Hunting Auton
Captain Munro paced nervously up and down in the hospital entrance hall,

rehearsing what he would say in his coming interview with the Brigadier. He sighed.
However you put it, it sounded just as bad. He heard the sound of a car drawing up
outside and went out onto the hospital steps.

The Brigadier got out of his staff car, cold anger in every line of his stiff figure.
Munro threw up a brisk salute. The Brigadier touched his cap brim with his swagger
stick in a brief acknowledgement and said, 'Well?'

Munro sighed. It was going to be even worse than he had feared. 'There was
some kind of a raid, sir. They knocked out Doctor Henderson and our sentry, and tried
to get the patient away.'

'Who did?'
'We're not sure, sir,' said Munro.
'Tried and succeeded, it seems,' said the Brigadier sourly.
'Well, not entirely, sir. I turned up just as they were getting him out of the

building. The patient got away in the confusion, they chased him, and I chased them.'
'And lost them.'
'Well—yes sir. You see, the man ran into the woods. He seemed to be making for

the police box where we found him. I thought it was more important to get him back.'
'Instead of which the poor chap was shot down by one of our sentries?'
'It was a very confused situation, sir,' said Munro defensively.
'It was a complete and utter botch-up!' snapped the Brigadier.
'How's the poor chap now?'
'Well, that's just it, sir. No one seems to know.'
The Brigadier said, 'I'd better see him.'
'There is one piece of good news, sir,' said Munro hopefully, as they walked

along the corridor. 'Our chaps have turned up one of these meteorite things. Or, rather,
the bits of one. It's on its way here now.'

'I'm delighted to hear that the Army managed to achieve something, besides the
shooting of a harmless civilian,' said the Brigadier as they entered the hospital room.

Doctor Henderson, still a little shaky himself, was leaning over his patient, once
more stretched out on the hospital bed. The Doctor lay completely motionless.
Henderson and the nurse were applying some instrument to his head.

Henderson looked up and nodded as the Brigadier entered, and said:
'Extraordinary. Quite extraordinary. Look at these readings.'

The Brigadier looked and was none the wiser. He said: 'How is he?'
'This registers the activity of the brain,' explained Henderson.
'Normally this line fluctuates considerably even when a person is unconscious.'
The Brigadier looked at the chart. 'Not a lot going on, eh?' he said, feeling that

some comment was expected.
Henderson was impatient. 'There's nothing whatever going on, as you put it.'
'But he isn't dead?'
'No. But you might say he was just barely ticking over.'
'Something to do with that bullet wound,' suggested Munro.
Henderson shook his head. 'That only left a slight graze across the scalp. Couldn't

account for this condition.'



The Brigadier was becoming impatient with all this medical mumbo jumbo.
'Then what does?' he asked.

Henderson rubbed his chin thoughtfully. 'It's only a guess, but I reckon this coma
is self-induced.'

'You mean the chap's put himself out?' asked the Brigadier.
'Why would he do that?'
'Again, I'm only guessing,' said Henderson. 'But it could be part of some kind

of healing process. A chance for his body to recover from all the stresses it's been
suffering.'

The Brigadier moved closer to the bed and studied the sleeping form. Everything
about him sounds like the Doctor, he thought. The police box, the strange physical
make-up. And he knew me. He really did know me. He knew about the Cyberman
and the Yeti. But there's no resemblance. No resemblance at all. The face, the height,
the build, the colour of the hair—all utterly and completely different.

And yet... The Brigadier could remember so many incredible things about the
man he had known as the Doctor. Was a change of appearance any more unbelievable
than all the rest?

He turned away from his bed. 'You'll keep me informed of his condition. I'd like
to know as soon as he can talk.'

'Yes, of course,' said Henderson. 'Oh, by the way, we found this clutched in his
hand.'

Henderson handed the Brigadier a little key. 'We had to prise his fingers open.
He was really hanging on to it.'

'Yes,' said the Brigadier thoughtfully, 'he would do. Thank you, Doctor
Henderson.' Followed by Munro, he turned and left the room.

Outside the hospital, a couple of soldiers were standing guard beside a wooden
ammunition box.

'That'll be the meteorite fragments, sir,' said Munro. The Brigadier peered inside
the box, as a soldier held open the lid. The box was about half-full of chunks of some
dull green substance, rather like heat-fused glass.

'All we could find, sir,' said Munro. 'It must have broken up when it hit the
ground.'

The Brigadier sniffed. 'Doesn't seem much result for all this effort. Keep
searching. See if you can find me a whole one. Oh, and put the box in the boot of my
car. Miss Shaw can take a look at it.'

The soldier took the box away and the Brigadier turned back to Munro. 'The
police box is already on its way to H.Q. I want a guard on the hospital at all times.'

'Yes, sir,' said Munro. 'We won't lose him again, I promise you.'
The Brigadier looked back at the hospital. 'What puzzles me is, why did those

people want to kidnap him?'
'Maybe he was one of them,' suggested Munro. 'They could have been trying to

rescue him.'

'Anyone get a good look at them?'
'Better than that, sir,' said Munro proudly. 'We've got a picture of their leader.

He produced a glossy photograph and handed it to the Brigadier.
The Brigadier studied the picture, obviously one of those taken on his first visit to

the hospital. The photograph showed the Brigadier talking to the crowd of journalists.



'That's him, there, sir,' said Munro. Over the Brigadier's shoulder in the picture
there could be seen a man standing, watching.

A well-dressed man with handsome, regular features and staring eyes.
'Several people recognised him, sir,' said Munro. 'He was here posing as a

pressman.'
'What about the other two?'
'Couldn't really get much of a description,' admitted Munro,
'only that they were very big. And there was something strange, blank-looking

about their faces. Probably wearing stocking masks.'
The Brigadier opened the door of his car. 'Three things, Munro. Keep searching

for the meteorites; guard that man in the hospital; and keep investigating the kidnap
attempt. Call me at H.Q., the minute there's news.' The Brigadier closed the car door
and the driver accelerated away. Munro gazed after the departing car. Is that all,
Brigadier, he thought to himself. And what do I do in my spare time?

As Harry Ransome drove down the familiar road towards the plastics factory,
his mind was in a turmoil. His thoughts kept circling round the letter, the incredible,
unbelievable letter that had been waiting for him on his return from his business trip
to America.

I'm not just going to accept it, he thought. They owe me an explanation, and I'm
going to get it. He drove through the gates and parked in his usual slot in the company
car-park. Picking up the bulging brief-case from the seat beside him, he got out of
the car and stood still for a moment, bracing himself. A smartly-dressed, dapper little
man in his early thirties, he usually radiated the warmth and charm of the top-class
salesman. But Ransome's face was grim and determined as he strode into the factory.

The girl behind the reception desk was new to him. She had a strange,
expressionless, doll-like prettiness. She looked up incuriously as he entered.

'My name's Ransome. We haven't met, but I expect you've heard of me. I work
here—or I used to. Head of Sales and Design.

Been with the firm for years.'
Still she didn't speak. Ransome took a deep breath. 'Just popping in to see Mr.

Hibbert. Don't worry, he won't mind. We're old friends. It's all right, I know the way.'
Ransome strode determinedly past her and through the door to the factory floor.

Then he stopped in amazement. Everything was different. The jolly white-coated girls
who worked on the production lines, the old-fashioned machnery turning out dolls'
heads and limbs and bodies—it was all gone. The place was completely deserted.

Ultra-modern equipment had been moved in, equipment that hummed and
whined, carrying out its tasks alone and unaided.

Automation, thought Ransome. Everything's been automated.
He walked between the new machines and crossed to a doorway. The door was

locked. A notice read 'Restricted Zone—Strictly Private'.
Ransome was indignant. They can't do that, he thought. That's my workshop.

Used to be my workshop. He glanced round, suddenly overcome by a strange feeling
of unease. Then he crossed the factory floor and climbed the flight of steps that led
to Hibbert's office.

The moment he was out of sight, the door he had been trying opened. A man
stood there, looking towards the flight of stairs. An immaculately-dressed man with
handsome, regular features and eyes that seemed to glow.



Ransome gave a perfunctory tap on Hibbert's office door and threw it open. He
stood for a moment, looking at the man behind the desk. Good old George Hibbert,
he thought ironically. Hasn't changed a bit—on the outside.

Hibbert rose slowly. 'Harry,' he said, in a flat level voice. 'I wasn't expecting you.'

'Weren't you? Then you should have been.' Ransome snatched an envelope from
his breast pocket and threw it on Hibbert's desk.

'What's all this about, George?'
Still in the same expressionless voice, Hibbert said, 'The letter explains

everything.'
'It explains nothing.' Ransome opened his brief-case, fished out a large doll and

dumped it on the desk. Hibbert looked at it incuriously. It was an elaborately-dressed
girl doll, with golden curls and a simpering smile. Ransome fished a remote-control
unit from the case and pressed a button.

Immediately, the doll struggled to its feet and began to walk slowly across the big
leather-topped desk, scattering Hibbert's papers. Ransome pressed a second control
and the doll began to talk in a high sweet voice. It said, 'Momma, momma, take me
for a walk.

Momma, momma, buy me some sweeties. Momma, momma...'
Ransome flung the control on to the desk and the doll became silent. Slowly it

toppled on to its face. Ransome drew a deep breath.
'Our famous A.1 Walkie Talkie doll,' he said. 'You do recognise it?'
Hibbert said nothing.
Ransome went on: 'When I invented this doll, you promised me full backing.

You sent me to the States to try and interest the Americans in joint production. You
said if it all worked out, we'd turn the whole factory over to making Walkie Talkies.
You were going to make me a partner.'

He paused for breath. Still Hibbert sat motionless and silent.
Ransomc took wads of papers from the brief-case and slapped them on the desk.

'Well, it's all here. Agreements ready to sign. Advance orders, the lot. And when I get
back home, what do I find? A letter cancelling the whole deal and giving me the push!'

Ransome looked appealingly at Hibbert. But still the older man made no
response.

Ransome's tone altered. 'George, we worked on this project together. I thought
we were friends. You helped me with the plans, you encouraged me. Now you just
put the chop on it. Don't you think you owe me some kind of an explanation?'

At last Hibbert looked up. 'There was a cheque enclosed with the letter. The
financial compensation was adequate.'

Ransome was ironic. 'Oh yes. All very generous. Only that doesn't happen to be
the point. I want to know why.'

'There were reasons for the decision,' said Hibbert tonelessly.
'Excellent reasons. I cannot explain further.'
'Why not? Why can't you explain?'
'It's the new policy. We've got a new policy. We are no longer manufacturing

dolls. We have turned over to other work.'
'This doll's the best thing we ever came up with,' Ransome insisted. 'You said

yourself there was a fortune in it.'



Hibbert repeated, 'We've got a new policy.'
'What about my workshop?' Ransome insisted. 'Why can't I get in there?'
For the first time Hibbert's face showed some animation. In an alarmed voice he

said, 'Stay away from there, Harry. You mustn't go in there. It isn't safe.'
'What about my tools, my equipment?'
'We'll send them to you. You must promise not to go near there. You shouldn't

have come back here, Harry. It isn't safe.'
Ransome looked curiously at his old colleague. Hibbert's manner had changed

completely. The inhuman coldness had gone.
Now there were traces of Hibbert's old self. But he seemed frightened, confused.
'Listen, George,' said Ransome gently. 'I'm sorry I blew up at you. Is anything

wrong? Are you in some kind of trouble?'
Hibbert shook his head as if to clear it. He said wildly, 'Harry...
Harry, you've got to get away... they'll kill—'
Hibbert stopped talking as the office door was flung open. A man stood in the

doorway. An immaculately-dressed man with handsome, regular features and glaring
eyes.

Ransome said: 'Who the blazes are you?'
The man said nothing but it was Hibbert who answered in the same cold flat

voice in which he had first spoken.

'This is Mr. Channing, my new partner. There's no point in going on with this
conversation. The letter explained everything.

Good day to you.'
Ransome opened his mouth as if to argue but something about the burning glare

in Channing's eyes seemed to destroy his will. He packed the doll and the papers back
into the brief-case and almost ran from the office, edging past the motionless figure
of Channing in the doorway. He could feel those burning eyes following all the way
across the factory floor. Not until he was back in his car, driving fast away from the
factory, did he begin to feel safe.

As the sound of his car died away, Channing turned coldly to Hibbert. 'You did
not handle the situation well.'

Hibbert said: 'It wasn't easy. He'd worked here for many years.
We were—friends.' His voice tailed off. Somehow he knew that friendship was

not a word that would have any meaning for Channing.
Channing's cold voice held a hint of puzzlement. 'The letter was clear. Themoney

offered was sufficient. Why did he not accept the situation?'
Hibbert tried again. 'He liked working for me, you see. He was interested in the

project, not just the money.'
'The correct letter would have fashioned his response.'
Hibbert rubbed his forehead. He sounded almost angry. 'It isn't as easy as you

make it sound. You don't understand people. They're not always so predictable.'
Channing swung round on him. Hibbert backed away in terror as those staring

eyes seemed to burn into his brain. But Channing spoke quietly, almost kindly.
'The visit of the man Ransome has disturbed you. But he is gone now. He will not

return. All you need do is continue to run the factory as though nothing had changed.
That is your sole concern, Hibbert. Do you understand?'



As always when Channing spoke to him in that tone, Hibbert felt calmed and
reassured. A sense of clear-headedness and well-being came over him. It was all so
simple. All he had to do was follow Channing's orders and everything would be all
right. He had to do what Channing told him because... because... Hibbert found that he
couldn't remember the reason. But he was quite sure that Channing must be obeyed,
that there would be the most terrible consequences if Channing became angry with
him. Hibbert's face twitched at the memory of some horror buried deep in his mind.

Then he became relaxed again, as he heard Channing's soothing voice.
'Do you understand, Hibbert? Do you understand?'
Hibbert said calmly: 'Yes, I understand.'
Channing turned away and stared broodingly out of the office window at the line

of trees which marked the beginning of Oxley Woods.
'Two of the energy units are still missing. The Autons have not succeeded in

finding them.'
Hibbert said worriedly: 'Perhaps they broke up on landing.'
'Perhaps. Or they may have buried themselves too deep in the soil of your planet.'
'Do you think that man in the hospital found one? Will you try to capture him

again?'
'No. It is too dangerous.'
'If the energy units are buried, how will you find them?'
'They will increase the strength of their pulsation signals. The Auton is searching

now. It will find them.'
Hibbert looked at him curiously. 'You talk of these energy units as if they were

alive.'
Channing turned and looked at this pitifully inadequate human creature. How

limited was its intelligence. How easily its mind could be controlled. Soon these
ridiculous little animals would be swept away, replaced as masters of this rich planet
by the all-conquering mind of the Nestenes. Still, for the moment it was useful. It
must be reassured, humoured.

Channing said gently: 'Energy is a form of life, Hibbert.'
Hibbert's worries persisted. 'What about UNIT? Do you think they suspect the

truth?'

Channing smiled coldly. 'Even if they do, their mindswill be too limited to accept
it—until it is too late. I do not think we have anything to fear from UNIT.'

Sam Seeley came out of the back door of his cottage. With a hasty look to make
sure his wife wasn't watching, he scuttled down to his shed, a tumbledown building
at the end of the long, overgrown cottage garden. He slipped inside and closed the
door behind him.

Then, furtively he dragged an old tin trunk from under his workbench and opened
the lid. Like a child with a new toy, Sam just couldn't resist taking another look at his
treasure. The wonderful find that was going to bring him fame and fortune —once
those idiots of soldiers realised that it took a man like Sam Seeley to find things in
the woods.

Seeley unwrapped the green globe with trembling fingers, till it lay exposed on
the crumpled sheet of tin foil. He stroked it gently.



'Worth a pound or two, you are, me beauty. I'll just hang on to you till they all
get a bit keener.'

Sam let his imagination wander, dreaming of a huge cash reward from a grateful
government. He'd have his picture in the local paper. Maybe they'd even want him to
go on telly. Sam was so wrapped up in his dream of wealth and glory that he scarcely
noticed when the globe began to pulse with a greenish glow, gently at first, then with
increasing strength.

Not far away in the woods the Auton had been standing motionless under a tree.
It was shaped like a man but it was not human. It wore dark, serviceable overalls. Its
face was a rough copy of a human face, but blank, unfinished, the features horribly
lumpy and crude. It stood, silent, motionless, waiting.

At precisely the moment that the globe in Seeley's trunk began to pulse, the
Auton came to life. Its whole body swung round like a radar antenna, first one way
and then the other. It swung back towards a particular point and then froze. Then, after
a moment it began to move forward in a clumsy, shambling run. It ran in a perfectly
straight line, snapping off the branches and bushes that were in its path. Only for big
obstacles, like trees, would it turn aside.

But it always returned unerringly to its course, pounding towards the signal that
was summoning it.

Sam Seeley was wakened from his dreams of glory by a familiar voice. 'Sam,
Sam Seeley! What you up to down there?' He peered through the shed window and
saw his wife,Meg, hurrying down the path. Instantly Sam tried to put the globe back in
the trunk but it slipped from his fingers and rolled under the workbench, still pulsing.
Sam threw some old sacking over it.

In the woods the approaching Auton quickened its pace as if the signal were
stronger.

Sam looked up innocently as the shed door flew open. His wife, Meg, a thin,
depressed lookingwoman in an old flowered apron, stood looking suspiciously at him.

'What you up to in there, Sam Seeley?'
Sam's face was a picture of virtuous indignation. 'Up to?
Nothing. Just a bit of sorting out.'
Meg looked suspiciously round the cluttered shed, and noticed the old tin trunk.

'What you doing with that old box?'
'Nothing.'
Meg had been married to Sam for over twenty years, and by now she disbelieved

everything he told her on principle.
'You haven't been thieving again, have you? 'Cause if you have...'
'Oh, that's nice, isn't it?' said Sam. 'Accusing your own husband.'
Meg opened the lid of the trunk and peered inside. It was empty.
'Satisfied?' asked Sam. 'Then how about getting me some grub? I'm hungry.'
'Just you watch your tongue,' said Meg indignantly. 'And don't you go bringing

any of your old rubbish in my house.' Slamming the shed door behind her, she
disappeared up the garden path and went inside the cottage kitchen.

Sam chuckled to himself. He fished out the glowing globe from beneath the pile
of sacking, re-wrapped it in the kitchen foil, put it back into the trunk, then closed the
lid. He slid the trunk back under the workbench, then left the shed.



In the woods the Auton stopped its remorseless progress. It swung its huge body
in an arc, first one way and then the other, searching for the lost signal. Finding
nothing, it simply stood there, waiting for the summons to come again. It could feel
no impatience, no tiredness, no hunger. These were human qualities, and the Auton
wasn't human. It would wait there for ever if need be, until its orders were changed,
or the summoning signal came again.

The Doctor lay stiff and straight, eyes closed, in the hospital bed. He looked
rather like the model of a crusader on an old tombstone.

Henderson looked down on him. 'Well, he's out of that deep coma. Seems to be
sleeping normally now.'

The nurse said: 'Do you think he's well enough to be handed over to the UNIT
people yet?' She spoke a little regretfully, as if she'd grown rather attached to this
unusual patient.

'Oh, I think so,' said Doctor Henderson. 'But Mr. Beavis is coming down
specially to examine him. Saw my report and insisted on having a look.'

The nurse gave him a sympathetic smile. Mr. Beavis was the hospital's senior
Surgical Consultant. He appeared only rarely, spending most of his time in his Harley
Street consulting rooms. His eccentric appearance and high-handed, lordly manner
never failed to strike terror into the junior staff.

'But Mr. Beavis is a surgeon,' said the nurse, puzzled. 'I don't see—'
'Exactly,' said Henderson cheerfully. 'I gather he thinks this chap is some kind

of interesting freak. Probably plans to open him up and sort out his innards for him.'
The nurse shuddered, and Henderson grinned at her. 'Come on, let's leave the

poor chap to rest while he can.'
Henderson and the nurse both left the room. As soon as the door closed behind

them, the Doctor's eyes opened and he sat bolt upright.

'Interesting freak,' he muttered indignantly. 'Well, nobody's going to sort out my
innards.' He swung his feet out of the bed, stood up and stretched.

'Now then, I wonder where they put my clothes.' The Doctor looked round the
room. His clothes were nowhere to be seen.

Cautiously he opened the door a crack, peered out, and then slipped out into the
deserted hospital corridor. First he'd find himself some clothes. Then he'd go and find
the TARDIS.

6



The Doctor Disappears
At that very moment two sweating soldiers were wrestling the TARDIS into a

corner of the UNIT laboratory, while Liz and the Brigadier looked on.
'Right, that'll do,' said the Brigadier, and the soldiers thankfully stopped shoving

and left the room.
'All you need now is a key,' said Liz. 'Maybe the police will lend you one.'
'As a matter of fact, Miss Shaw, I already have the key.' The Brigadier produced

the little key that Henderson had taken from the Doctor's hand.
The wall 'phone-buzzer sounded and the Brigadier picked up the receiver. He

listened for a moment, said: 'Yes, yes, very well,'
and put the 'phone down, frowning. He turned to Liz.
'General Scobie is on his way up.'
Liz raised her eyebrows inquiringly.
'He's our Liaison Officer with the Regular Army,' explained the Brigadier.

'Technically, he's my immediate superior. Very important to keep on good terms with
him. His men are carrying out the search.'

Liz returned to her workbench. 'As long as you don't expect me to salute him.'
The Brigadier heaved an exasperated sigh. 'Really, Miss Shaw, if you could try

to be a little less difficult.'
Liz was still in a bad mood because her experiments were going badly. 'I didn't

ask to come here, remember?' she said.
The Brigadier's equally acid reply was cut off by the entrance of General Scobie.

Scobie was in his middle fifties, with a grizzled grey moustache. He was a rather
shy man who took refuge behind a rough military manner, snapping out orders and
questions in a gruff voice. But his bark was very much worse than his bite. He and
the Brigadier got on extremely well.

Scobie looked round the laboratory, and at the busily-working Liz.
'Sorry to interrupt, Brigadier,' he barked. 'Just thought I'd look in, you know.'
'Always a pleasure to see you, sir,' said the Brigadier smoothly.
'Miss Shaw, may I present General Scobie? Miss Shaw is our new Scientific

Adviser.'
Scobie said gruffly: 'You're a lucky feller, Lethbridge-Stewart—having a pretty

girl around the place.'
Liz, who was in no mood for frivolity, gave him a quelling look and went on

with her work.
The Brigadier hastened to smooth over the moment's awkwardness. 'Miss Shaw

is working on the meteorite operation for us,' he said.
Scobie seized the topic thankfully. 'Ah yes, yes. Anything new on that? Papers

seem to be going wild. Martians... space ships... silly season, y'know.' Suddenly
Scobie caught sight of the battered old blue police box standing in the corner. His
eyes widened. 'What the devil are you doing with a police box?'

Liz looked up. 'As a matter of fact, General Scobie, it isn't a police box at all.
It's a camouflaged space-ship.'

Scobie stared at her, then started to laugh. 'Camouflaged space-ship, hey?' he
said. 'I like that. Very good, young lady, very good.'



He turned to the Brigadier. 'Like to see a sense of humour among the troops.
Good for morale, you know, good for morale.'

With some difficulty the Brigadier managed a tight smile.
'Quite sir. Well, I think we should let Miss Shaw get on with her work. Perhaps

a drink in my office, sir?' The Brigadier quickly ushered General Scobie out of the
laboratory, shooting an exasperated look at Liz over the General's shoulder. Liz
chuckled, and went back to her work, feeling rather cheered up by the encounter.

The Doctor strolled along the hospital corridor in his dressing-gown,
occasionally exchanging a cheerful nod with a nurse or a fellow patient. Sooner or
later, he realised, someone was going to ask him what he was up to. That is if he didn't
run slap into Henderson, or his own particular nurse. Suddenly, he heard the familiar
sound of Henderson's voice. 'Hope you had a good journey, sir?'

The voice was just round the next corner. Immediately, the Doctor opened the
nearest door, looking for a hiding-place. He found himself in a small room, one side
of which was lined with lockers.

Another door, at the far end, led into a washroom. Footsteps stopped outside in
the corridor. Henderson's voice said: 'How were the roads, sir?' Another voice, high-
pitched and querulous, answered:

'Shockingly overcrowded, as usual. No room for a decent car these days.' The
door to the corridor started to open.

The Doctor dashed through into the washroom. He looked round wildly at the
row of washbasins. Then he spotted the shower-stall in the corner... Hastily he began
pulling off his dressing-gown.

In the locker-room, Henderson was helping Mr. Beavis off with his driving
clothes. One of the old boy's many eccentricities was to drive a vintage Edwardian
Rolls. He dressed accordingly.

Henderson slipped the long driving cape from Beavis's shoulders and hung it
up. Beavis pulled off his Sherlock Holmes deerstalker. The two men walked into the
washroom. Beavis took his jacket off and began to wash his hands.

'What are all those toy soldiers doing round the place?'
Henderson had to raise his voice to answer. Loud splashing and tuneless singing

was coming from the shower-stall.
'Searching for lost Government equipment. That's how they found the patient,

you know, sir.'
Beavis cackled: 'And then they shot him, eh?'
'It was all a bit unfortunate,' agreed Henderson.
A new thought struck Beavis. 'Listen, I've left me car outside.
They won't go muckin' about with it, will they?'
Henderson passed the old man a towel and stood by to help him on with his

jacket. 'I'm sure it'll be quite safe, sir. As a matter of fact, I've asked them to look
after it for you.'

'I thought perhaps a cup of tea in my office, sir?' said Henderson. 'You could
take a look at my notes and records. Then we could go and see the patient.'

Beavis settled his jacket onto his shoulders and turned to go. A note of
enthusiasm came into his voice. 'What I thought we could do, d'you see... just a brief
exploratory operation. Open him up, take a poke around, see what's what.'



The old man's voice faded as Henderson ushered him through to the locker-room
and out into the corridor. The door closed behind them. The Doctor's indignant face
popped out between the shower curtains. 'Poke around!' he said. 'Poke around! Oh
no you don't!'

Wrapped in a towel, the Doctor stepped out of the shower and went through into
the locker-room. The lockers contained all kinds of different garments, stored for the
hospital's in-patients. The Doctor rooted around and found the locker with his own
clothes. He fished them out, and looked at them sadly. The coat was wrinkled, the
trousers were baggy, and both were far too small. He shook his head.

'You'd think if they changed the body, they'd remember to change the clothes
to fit.' Well, he wouldn't get far looking like a scarecrow. He needed a disguise.
Ruthlessly the Doctor began to rummage through all the other lockers, hauling
garments out and tossing them on the floor with wild abandon.

Ten minutes later he stood looking at himself in a mirror. The dark trousers were
quite a decent fit, and so was the velvet jacket.

The frilly white shirt, once the property of an aspiring pop star, added a touch of
gaiety. So did the floppy bow tie. The Doctor gave his new appearance an approving
nod. In his old body, he'd never bothered about clothes, but in his new appearance
they seemed rather important to him.

The Doctor spotted Beavis's cape and deerstalker hanging up.
Just what he needed. 'Serve the old butcher right,' he said cheerfully to himself.

'And didn't he say something about a Rolls?' He slipped the cloak round his shoulders
and pulled the deerstalker over his eyes. Finally he went through the pockets of his
old clothes. 'Sonic screwdriver, TARDIS detector... Yes, it all seems to be there.'

Quickly the Doctor transferred his possessions into his new pockets.
Then he slipped Beavis's cape round his shoulders, pulled the deerstalker down

over his forehead and cautiously opened the door into the corridor.

Hastily he pulled it shut again as once more he heard familiar voices.
'Dammit, Henderson, if those notes are accurate, the feller must be a freak,'

Beavis was saying.
'They're accurate, I promise you, sir,' Henderson replied. 'But if he is a freak, he

seems to be a very healthy one. I don't see that an operation...'
'Where's your sense of adventure?' asked Beavis. 'Haven't had a really interesting

operation for years. It'd be a challenge.'
The Doctor shuddered to himself as the voices moved away.
Then he opened the door again, stepped out into the corridor, andmade off hastily

in the opposite direction.
As the Doctor strode across the foyer, with a brief nod to the receptionist, a

passing medical student said to his friend, 'Old blood-and-bones isn't honouring us
for long. He's only just arrived.'

'Good job too,' said the other. 'He's probably finished off poor old Henderson's
patient for him already.'

The Doctor emerged onto the steps. A soldier was standing guard on a very
handsome vintage Rolls-Royce.

The sentry looked up in alarm as he saw the tall, imposing figure bearing down
upon him. They'd impressed it upon him that the old boy was some kind of VIP.



'All present and correct, sir,' said the soldier as the Doctor climbed on board.
'Very handsome vehicle, sir.'

'Harrumph,' replied the Doctor, thanking his lucky stars that the key was still in
the dashboard. The old engine turned over sluggishly, and the Doctor revved it up
again, In the room that had been the Doctor's, Beavis and Henderson were staring,
perplexed, at a very empty bed.

'Some kind of prank, is it?' said Beavis querulously.
'He was here just a moment ago,' said Henderson.
A coughing roar was heard from outside. 'My car!' the old man yelped angrily.

'Someone's muckin' about with my car!' He rushed from the room.

With Henderson panting behind, Beavis rushed out on to the main steps, just as
the Doctor got the old Rolls engine turning over to his satisfaction.

'Stop, stop,' yelled Beavis. 'Get out of that car at once!' The Doctor raised his
hand in a lordly wave, put his foot down hard. He accelerated down the drive, through
the main gates, and out of sight.

'Stop, stop,' yelled Beavis. 'Get out of that car at once!'

As the Doctor sped along the road that led through Oxley Woods he caught
sight of the Army patrols, still searching. But it didn't arouse much interest in him.
As yet, the Doctor had no idea of the significance of the meteorite shower that had
accompanied his arrival on the planet Earth. He had only one idea in his mind—
to find the TARDIS, and its key, and resume his travels through Time and Space.
He glanced down at the device on the seat beside him. In appearance it was like an
old-fashioned pocket-watch. But instead of hands, the dial bore a single needle. That
needle always pointed unerringly towards the TARDIS. It was quivering now. With
a smile of satisfacdon the Doctor sped on his way.

Deep in the woods Corporal Forbes and his patrol were bending excitedly over
their detection device. They were on the borders of a small stream which ran through
a clearing.

'It's a reading, Corp,' said one of the soldiers excitedly. 'I'm sure it's a reading.
Can't seem to see anything, though.'



Forbes squatted on his boot-heels. The reading was strongest at the very edge of
the stream. Carefully Forbes began to smooth away the muddy soil, digging gently
with his strong fingers. Soon his fingers touched a round smooth shape.

'Shovel,' snapped Forbes, and one of the others hastily passed him a short-
handled trench shovel from his pack.

As Forbes dug cautiously, the spherical shape of a meteorite was gradually
revealed.

'Must have buried itself in the wet mud, see,' said the Corporal.
'Then the water smoothed over the mud, covered the traces, like. Get Captain

Munro on the RT, lad. Tell him the good news.'
As the soldier turned to his field radio, the sphere was already beginning to pulse

with a green, unearthly light.
Not far away, an Auton came to life. It spun round in an arc, spun back again,

getting a fix on the signals from the sphere.
Lurching forward the Auton began its march towards the unsuspecting soldiers.
When Munro arrived in the clearing the sphere, now pulsing strongly and

regularly, had been completely dug up. It was resting on sacking in the bottom of an
ammunition-box.

Munro looked at the sphere with curiosity. 'Well done, Corporal Forbes, jolly
well done. Carry it up to the jeep, will you?'

The two soldiers picked up the ammunition-box by its rope handles. WithMunro
and Forbes in the lead, the little group headed for the road.

'The Brigadier will want this in the lab at H.Q.,right away,'
said Munro.
'Going to drive it up yourself, sir?' asked Forbes. Munro considered; the idea

was tempting. But other patrols were still searching. He was needed on the spot to
coordinate their efforts.

Anyway, thought Munro, fair's fair. Forbes had done well to find the meteorite.
He deserved to be the one to hand it over.

'I think that honour should be yours, Corporal,' said Munro as they reached the
jeep. 'I'll let the Brigadier know you're on your way.'

Two soldiers lowered the ammunition-box carefully into the back of the jeep.
They lashed the box into place to make it secure.

Forbes got into the driving seat.
'Quick as you can, Corporal,' said Munro. 'But no accidents!'
Forbes grinned. He was a very experienced driver. He'd never had an accident

in his life. At a nod fromMunro, he started the jeep rolling and disappeared down the
country lane, with a roar of exhaust.

'Lucky blighter,' said one of the soldiers enviously. 'He'll be down the pub
tonight, while we're camping out in the wild, wet woods.'

Briskly, Munro turned to them. 'Let's not rest on our laurels, eh? Quite a number
of those things came down. So far we've turned up one broken one and one whole
one. Got to do better than that, haven't we?'

With an inward sigh, the soldiers shouldered their detection gear and returned
to the search.

Once the sphere was in the jeep, the Auton realised that pursuit was hopeless.
The energy unit was moving away too fast. The Auton stopped, apparently baffled.



But the tiny fragment of intelligence that animated the Auton was also a part of the
supreme brain of the Nestenes. Part of it, and in constant communication with it.
That particular Auton became motionless. The problem no longer concerned it. Fresh
orders had been transmitted to one of its fellows, better placed for immediate action.

Corporal Forbes was whistling cheerfully as he drove through the woods. Decent
of young Munro to let him deliver the meteorite to H.Q. Some officers would have
hogged that job themselves. Taken all the credit, too. Might be a spot of leave in this,
with any luck.

Maybe even another stripe.
These happy thoughts were suddenly interrupted. A figure stepped from the

woods ahead of his jeep. Big chap, wearing overalls. He just stood there in the middle
of the road, waiting. Hitch-hiker probably, thought Forbes. Some hopes, this trip.

He made a negative wave of his hand and moved the wheel to drive round the
obstruction. But the figure dodged suddenly in front of the jeep, and Forbes had to
jam on the brakes to avoid hitting it.

The jeep skidded to a halt, its nose in the roadside ditch. Forbes jumped out,
shaken and furious.

'You stupid great oaf,' he yelled. 'Might have got killed. Why don't you...'
His voice tailed away as, for the first time, he got a clear look at the giant figure

bearing remorselessly down on him. The bloke was enormous, he thought. A giant.
And the face! Blank and lumpy and shapeless, like a waxwork left in the sun.

Forbes became aware that the giant was ignoring him and making straight for
the ammunition-box lashed to the back of the wrecked jeep. From the corner of his
eye, he saw that the lid of the box had flown open. The sphere was flashing rapidly
with a kind of furious brightness. Forbes ran to the back of the jeep and grabbed his
rifle. Training it on the advancing figure, he stood guard over the box.

'Now listen, mate,' said Forbes, his voice showing none of the panic he was
beginning to feel. 'This is government business, see, so just you clear off! I don't want
to open fire, but just you believe me, if I've got to, I will.'

His words had absolutely no effect on the advancing figure, now coming very
close. Forbes, realising that his enemy wasn't even human, opened fire without the
slightest hesitation. He emptied a full clip of bullets into the massive chest. The giant
was by now so close that Forbes plainly saw the line of holes appear across the breast
of the dark coveralls. But there was no blood, thought Forbes frantically. No blood,
and the thing just kept on coming.

Swinging his empty rifle as a club, Forbes landed a tremendous blow on the huge,
smooth head. The giant staggered, then smashed the rifle from his grasp, casually, as
if swatting a fly.

The last thing Forbes saw, as another blow struck him to the ground, was that
blank, expressionless face looming over him.

The Auton lifted the body of Corporal Forbes in one hand and tossed it into the
ditch. Then moving to the back of the jeep, it took hold of the ammunition-box. The
tough manilla ropes, snapped like cotton. The Auton lifted the box clear of the jeep,
and carrying its flashing, pulsating burden almost reverently, disappeared amongst
the trees.

In the restricted zone of the plastics factory, strange alien machinery whirred and
hummed and glowed. There came a soft glugging sound as the plastic mix flowed



through the pipes. In the centre of the area stood a vast opaque container, shaped
very like a coffin. Thick pipes coiled around it, feeding in nutrients. Channing stood
watching with quiet satisfaction as deep inside the container something moved and
stirred, and grew. Along the walls stood a motionless line of Autons. They seemed to
be watching the thing in the tank, waiting eagerly for something to happen.

A buzzer sounded from the doorway. Channing did not move.
'Yes?'
A nervous voice said, 'It's me. Hibbert.'
Channing touched a control button and the door slid open.
Hibbert entered cautiously. He hated coming to this place. 'General Scobie has

arrived.'
Channing nodded. 'I have almost finished.' He turned his burning eyes on

Hibbert. 'I shall need more carbon disulphide tomorrow.' The creature in the tank
needed constant nourishment if it was to grow and live. Hibbert glanced curiously at
the coffin-shaped tank. He hadn't been told what was in there. He didn't like to think
about it.

Channing watched him. 'It would be better if you did not come to this section
again. We are approaching a critical point. It could be dangerous for you.'

Hibbert looked at the motionless Autons lining the wall.
'I thought you had control over them. You said they were just walking weapons.'
Channing said softly: 'I have some control over them. But they also have a life

of their own. Their over-riding function is to kill.
You will appear to them as just another target.'
Hibbert shuddered, and thankfully followed Channing from the room. The thing

in the tank continued to move and grow. The line of Autons watched and waited. At
the feet of one of them was an ammunition-box. But now it was empty.

7



The Horror in the Factory
Angrily the Brigadier snapped into the 'phone: 'For heaven's sake, man, what

happened?'
Munro's voice was apologetic. 'We just don't know, sir. The jeep was in the ditch.

So was Corporal Forbes, with his neck broken.
No sign of the ammo-box or the meteorite.'
'Could it have been an accident?'
Munro sounded dubious. 'It could, sir. But Forbes was an expert driver. He could

have driven into a ditch and broken his neck in the fall. The box with the meteorite
could have broken loose in the crash. But in that case where is it? We've searched
the entire area.'

'Well, keep searching! I'll try to send you down some more men. Let me know as
soon as there's news.', The Brigadier went to see Liz Shaw and told her the bad news.

'It seems as if somebody, or something, doesn't want us to get hold of one of
those meteorites,' he concluded gloomily. The internal 'phone on the wall buzzed and
he sighed in exasperation as he grabbed the receiver.

'Yes, now what?'
'Main gate security here, sir. Someone insists on seeing you.,
'Didn't you give him the usual cover-story?'
'Yessir. Told him this building was a branch of the Pensions Department, and

we'd never heard of you. He said nonsense, it was UNIT H.Q., and he insisted on
seeing Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart.

Er, he said you'd pinched some of his property, sir,' finished the voice
apologetically.

'What does he look like?'
'Tall thin bloke, sir, old-fashioned clothes. Driving an old-fashioned car, come

to that.'
The Brigadier was jubilant. 'Whatever you do, don't let him get away.'

'He doesn't want to get away, sir,' said the voice. 'He wants to come in and see
you. Most insistent he is.'

'Then don't stand there dithering, man,' said the Brigadier rather unfairly. 'Send
him in at once.'

He turned to Liz, almost spluttering with excitement. 'It's him.
That chap. He's actually had the cheek to turn up here. How the blazes did he

find this place?'
'Wait and ask him,' suggested Liz practically. A few minutes later the Doctor

was shown into the room.
He strode across to the astonished Brigadier and shook him warmly by the hand.

'Lethbridge-Stewart, my dear fellow!' He looked at the TARDIS and patted it
affectionately. 'And here she is, all safe and sound. How kind of you to look after her!'

From behind her laboratory bench, Liz watched the Doctor with interest. This
was a very different figure from the deathly-still form she'd seen stretched out on the
hospital bed. It was obvious that the Doctor, if that was who he was, was now fully
recovered He was tall and elegant in the old-fashioned clothes that seemed to suit him



so well. And he positively crackled with life and energy, completely overwhelming
the somewhat stunned Brigadier.

'Now then, old chap,' the Doctor went on briskly, 'there's just the little matter of
the key. Don't happen to have it, do you!'

'As a matter of fact I do,' said the Brigadier. 'But it doesn't seem to work.'
'Ah, but it will for me,' said the Doctor, with a charming smile.
'It's personally coded, you see, keyed to my molecular structure.' And he held

out his hand.
But the Brigadier didn't respond. 'Not so fast. I've got one or two questions to

ask you.'
'Questions? My dear chap, it's not a bit of use asking me questions. I've lost my

memory, you see.'
The Brigadier was sceptical. 'Have you now? That's very convenient.'
'Not so much lost it exactly,' explained the Doctor, 'as had it taken away. Not all

of it, of course. I mean I remember you quite clearly. But quite a lot of other things
are a bit cloudy. Things will probably come back to me in time.' He smiled, as if
everything had been made perfectly clear.

'I see. So you claim to be suffering from some kind of partial amnesia?'
The Doctor looked distressed. 'You do like to spell things out, don't you?'
'And you also claim to be the man I once knew as "the Doctor"?'
'That's it, old chap, you're getting there,' said the Doctor encouragingly. Liz

suppressed a smile.
'And yet,' said the Brigadier triumphantly, 'your whole appearance is totally

different. How do I know you're not an impostor?'
The Doctor seemed delighted. 'Ah, but you don't, old chap, you don't! Only I

know that.' He noticed a mirror and immediately began pulling faces into it. 'How do
you like my new face, by the way? I wasn't too sure about it myself at first, but it's
beginning to grow on me. And it's flexible, you know, very flexible.' To prove his
point, the Doctor began to pull a variety of extraordinary faces.

The Brigadier took a deep breath and sank rather groggily onto a laboratory stool.
'All right, Doctor, all right! Say I accept this rigmarole, there are still quite a few
things to be explained.'

Liz, deciding she'd been ignored long enough, cleared her throat meaningly. The
Brigadier waved a distracted hand towards her. 'This is Miss Shaw, our new Scientific
Adviser.' The Doctor was waggling his eyebrows into the mirror.

'Did you know that on the planet Delphon they communicate only with their
eyebrows?' He waggled his eyebrows ferociously at Liz. 'That's Delphon for how
do you do.' He grinned infectiously and Liz couldn't help smiling back. There was
something very engaging about this colourful madman. 'How do you do,' she said.
'What are you a Doctor of, by the way?'

He waved his hand airily. 'Practically everything, my dear, practically
everything.'

The Brigadier harrumphed. 'You arrived last night slap in the middle of a shower
of very unusual meteorites.'

The Doctor said: 'Did I really now? How fascinating.'



Briefly the Brigadier summarised recent events. The meteorite shower, the
finding of the Doctor, the attempted kidnapping and the disappearance of the one
whole meteorite that had been found: The Doctor listened with an air of deep interest.

'So you see,' said the Brigadier, 'I can't possibly let you leave until I'm sure there's
no connection—'

The Doctor interrupted: 'That's most unfair. I've no recollection of last night.
Even that kidnapping business seems just a sort of nightmare...' Suddenly his attention
was attracted by the fragments on the lab bench. 'What are these?'

Liz said: 'Those are fragments of something the Brigadier thought was a
meteorite.'

The Doctor looked at her. 'And you don't?' He began to finger the fragments,
turning them over and over. 'Plastic!' he said in a surprised tone. 'Surely this is some
form of plastic?'

Liz nodded. 'Apparently. But it's not thermo-plastic, and neither is it thermo-
setting. And there are no polymer chains.'

The Doctor's manner was now completely serious. Liz watched in fascination as
his long fingers turned the fragments over and over on their tray. He weighed some
pieces in his hand. 'Most interesting.

I wonder what was inside.'
'Inside?'
'Well, it's obvious, isn't it, this was some kind of hollow sphere?' Deftly his

fingers assembled the pieces into a curved shape.
'I'd say the space in the middle was about three thousand cubic centimetres,

wouldn't you agree?'
Liz looked at him with new respect. The calculation, if it was accurate, had been

done with astonishing speed.
The Brigadier had been watching the two of them with interest.
It looked as if they would make a good team. He stood up. 'Do I gather you're

going to help us—Doctor?'
'If I do, will you give me back the key to the TARDIS?'
The Brigadier nodded. 'Certainly—once this matter has been satisfactorily

cleared up.'

The Doctor looked keenly at him. There was a hint of resentment in his eyes.
Then he smiled, seeming to accept the situation. 'In that case, Brigadier, I suggest
you allow Miss Shaw and myself to get on with our work.' The Doctor turned back
to Liz. 'Do I have to call you Miss Shaw? Should be Doctor Shaw, I suppose, really.
Or even Professor Shaw?'

'Just Liz will do fine.'
'Splendid!'
The Brigadier said, 'Right then, I'll leave you to it.' 'Just a moment, old chap,'

said the Doctor. 'How many of these meteorite things came down?'
'About fifty, near as the radar people could estimate.' The Doctor frowned. 'And

all you've found is this?' He indicated the tray of fragments.
'That, and the whole one, which disappeared on the way here.'
The Doctor slipped out of his cape and threw it across a stool.



'Well, it's obvious what's been happening, isn't it? Before your search could get
really under way, most of these things were collected.' The Doctor looked from Liz
to the Brigadier. 'Collected and taken somewhere. Question is—where?'

Harry Ransome steered his car carefully down the bumpy forest track. One half
of his mind knew that what he was planning was completely daft. But he was
determined to go on with it.

After his extraordinary interview with George Hibbert, he'd driven very fast to
the local market town and treated himself to several drinks. Hewent over the interview
in his mind time and time again... the strange remote manner of old George, almost
as though he'd been hypnotised.. the way he'd suddenly seemed more like himself
as he'd warned of danger... the arrival of Channing with his burning eyes... the way
George had suddenly become a zombie again.

The more he thought about it, the more convinced Ransome had become that
there was something very wrong indeed at the factory. Perhaps George was being
threatened, or blackmailed.

Maybe they had him under some kind of drug. After his fourth drink, Ransome
was certain that for George's sake, as well as his own, he had to investigate further.
He'd thought of telling the police. But what was there to tell them? The grumbles of
a discontented ex-employee?

No, first he had to find evidence. In this mood, Ransome had left the pub and
gone to look for a hardware shop.

The track became too narrow to drive any further. He stopped the car and got out.
From the boot he produced a pair of heavy-duty wire-cutters. He moved through the
trees to the wire fence that marked the boundary between the factory and the woods.

Inside the factory, General Scobie's tour had come to an end.
He'd expressed polite interest in all the impressive new automated machinery.

Now the real purpose—the very flattering purpose—of his visit had been reached.
Scobie was a genuinely shy and modest man. It had never occurred to him that

anyone would ever consider him as any kind of celebrity. He had been astonished
when Hibbert had contacted him, and had needed quite a bit of persuasion before
agreeing. 'Just a simple soldier, you know. Doing my duty.' 'Exactly, General,'

Hibbert had said, 'that's just the sort of people wewant. Not the showy celebrities,
always getting in the papers and on television, but the oneswho really keep the country
going.' Eventually Scobie had agreed to come to the factory.

Now, in the factory's Replica Room, he was feeling a little hurt. The blank-faced
dummy he was looking at bore only a very rough resemblance to him. Channing
hastened to explain: 'You see, General, this is just the first draft, so to speak. Prepared
frommeasurements and drawings. For the final process we need your actual presence.
If you wouldn't mind standing over there?'

Channing indicated a sort of upright coffin, surrounded with complex
instruments. Gingerly, Scobie stepped inside. Immediately, the instruments
surrounding him sprang to life. They hummed and whirred and clicked and buzzed
excitedly.

'Every detail of your appearance is being recorded, General,'
explained Channing. 'The measurements of the facial planes are accurate to

millionths of a centimetre.'



Scobie grinned uneasily. 'Jolly impressive,' he said as the instruments fell silent,
and Channing helped him to step out. 'I hope it all turns out all right.'

'It will, General,' said Channing solemnly. 'I can promise you that.'

Ransome meanwhile was dodging from machine to machine across the factory
floor. Not that there was anyone about to see him.

The whole place was deserted. He reached the door to the Restricted Area, and
set to work, using his wire-cutters and an improvised crowbar. Savagely he wrenched
at the lock, and in a few minutes he had it open. He slipped inside.

Once through the door, he looked round him in astonishment.
The machinery here was far more advanced in design, more alien in purpose,

than anything out on the factory floor. Fascinated, he moved towards the huge coffin-
shaped tank that dominated the centre of the area. Lights flashed and machinery
hummed, as if in warning as he moved closer, trying to get a clear look at the huge
thing that writhed sluggishly inside the tank.

Ransome had failed to notice the line of silent Autons as they stood motionless
against the wall behind him. Absorbed in what he was looking at, he didn't sec at first
when one of them, the nearest, turned its head to look at him, and then suddenly came
to life, taking a step forwards. On its second step, some instinct warned Ransome and
he looked behind him. He leaped back as the giant figure came towards him.

The thing held out its hand in a curious pointing gesture. Then, to Ransome's
unbelieving horror, the giant hand dropped away from the wrist on some kind of
hinged joint. The hand dangled limply to reveal a tube, projecting from the wrist. It
was like the muzzle of a gun.

For a moment Ransome stood terrified, then he instinctively hurled himself to
one side. A sizzling bolt of energy whizzed past his head, drilling a plate-sized hole
in the steel wall. Ransome look at it incredulously, and the Auton raised its hand to
fire again.

By pure chance, Ransomemade the one move that could save his life. He ducked
round the side of the plastic coffin, sheltering behind it. The Auton paused. An over-
riding point in its programming was that the tank and its contents must not be harmed.

Lowering its wrist-gun, the Auton began to stalk Ransome round the tank,
waiting for the chance of a clear shot at him. By keeping the tank between them



Ransome was able to edge near the door. He made a sudden dash through it, leaving
the shelter of the tank. The Auton fired another energy-bolt, missing Ransome's head
by inches, and blasting another hole in the wall. Then it pursued Ransome out on to
the factory floor.

A sizzling bolt of energy whizzed past Ransome's head.

Another energy-bolt whizzed past Ransome's head as he dodged between the
machinery. There followed a terrifying game of hide-and-seek. Ransome ducked and
dodged around the machinery, desperately avoiding the hunting Auton. He realised
that the creature must have some kind of intelligence. It consistently managed to block
his way to the exit. All the time it was edging closer and closer, confining him to one
corner of the factory. With a feeling of terror Ransome realised that he was running
out of hiding-places. He could see the Auton coming closer, wrist-gun raised.

Suddenly he heard footsteps and voices. He peered cautiously from behind a
machine casing. Coming towards him across the factory area was Hibbert, talking to
a man in army officer's uniform.

Ransome was about to call for help, when he saw Channing following along
behind. Ransome kept silent. Something told him that he would get no help from
Charming. As he watched, Channing suddenly stopped walking. Those strange,
burning eyes swept round the factory floor. Ransome shuddered and ducked out of
sight.

As soon as hemade contact with the consciousness of the Auton, Channing knew
everything that had happened. He knew of Ransome's breaking in, the hunt across
the factory, the fierce desire of the Auton to destroy the intruder. Swiftly Channing
weighed up the factors. It was too soon to risk Scobie seeing anything that would
disturb him. Channing flashed a mental command and the Auton stepped back in a
shadowed corner and became motionless.

Instantly, Ransome seized his chance, weaving between the machinery and
dashing out through the doorway by which he had entered.

Channing walked up to Scobie and Hibbert, who had been waiting for him in
some puzzlement.

'Everything all right?' asked Hibbert.
'Forgive me, gentlemen,' said Channing, 'just a sudden problem, something I

must attend to later.'
'Jolly quiet round here,' said Scobie. 'Doesn't seem to be anyone in the place.'
Hibbert said: 'We're turning over to full automation, General.
The factory virtually runs itself.'
Scobie chuckled. 'Splendid. Don't get any of this strike nonsense, eh? Didn't I

see a big chap in overalls just now, though?'
Channing said: 'We still have one or two men about the place, for the heavy

work. Your car's through this way, General Scobie.'
They walked to where the General's limousine stood waiting.
Scobie held out his hand. 'Well, goodbye, gentlemen. Been a most interesting

afternoon.' Channing hesitated, hands still clasped behind him. It was Hibbert who
stepped forward and shook Scobie's hand.



'Goodbye, sir, and thank you once again for coming down here. We know how
busy you must be.'

'You'll let me see the model of me when it's really finished?'
'You will certainly see it, General,' said Channing, '... when the time comes.'
Scobie got into his car, and was driven away. Channing and Hibbert looked after

him a moment, and then walked back into the factory.

Ransome meanwhile was struggling through the hole he had cut in the wire. He
ran for his car, jumped in, and reversed as fast as he could up the forest track. Not
until he was back on the road and driving very fast towards London did he even begin
to feel safe.

Suddenly, he saw a small group of soldiers emerge from the forest.
He jammed on his brakes and wound down the car window.
'Hey... hey you!'
The NCO in charge of the patrol came up to the car. 'Anything wrong, sir?'
'There's something terribly wrong. They just tried to murder me!'
The Corporal looked at Ransome's wild-eyed face with some caution.
'Better tell the police then, sir. There's a police station down in the village.'
'It's not a matter for the police. Look, let me talk to somebody senior. One of

your officers.'
The Corporal considered for a moment, then decided to play it safe. Probably

the man was just a nut, but you never knew.
'Captain Munro's in the Command Tent. At the end of that lane, just down there.

You could have a word with him.'
Ransome's car was already speeding down the road. The Corporal shook his

head, and he and his men resumed their patrol.

In the factory's security area, Channing and Hibbert stood looking at a small
screen. Hibbert said: 'You're sure it was Ransome?

You didn't actually see him.'
Channing indicated the Auton, now once more standing in line with its fellows.

'The Auton saw him. It comes to the same thing.'
Channing looked at Hibbert almost with pity. These humans with their limited,

separate minds. How could they understand the essential unity of the Nestene
consciousness? He touched a control and a bright cobwebby pattern appeared on the
screen. 'The detection scanner has registered his brain-print.'

Hibbert looked frightened. 'What will you do?'
'Send the Autons to destroy him.'
'No, Channing, no! You can't just kill him! He was my friend.'
Channing came close, his burning eyes boring intoHibbert's very brain. He spoke

soothingly: 'It is necessary, Hibbert. He saw all this. He saw the Autons. No one can
see those things and live. No one except you, Hibbert. Think, and you will see that
it is necessary.'

Hibbert's mind became calm. Of course Ransome had to die. It was unfortunate,
but logical. 'How will the Autons find him?'

Channing said: 'They are programmed now to detect his brain-print and destroy
him on sight.' He looked at the pattern on the screen. 'He is still in the area. Soon



they will find him.' As if at a silent command, the line of Autons jerked into life, and
marched silently from the room.

Hibbert said: 'You are sending all of them to hunt for Ransome?'
'If they find Ransome they will kill him. But that is not their primary purpose.

All of the energy units have been recovered or accounted for. All except one. But
that one is the most important of all.' Channing swung round on Hibbert, his eyes
burning with a fierce unearthly light. 'Before the invasion can begin, we must find
the swarm leader!'

Sam Seeley took a noisy swig from his mug of tea, and looked up defiantly at
his wife. 'How do you know it weren't an accident, then, eh? How do you know?'

Meg's voice was hushed with drama. 'The soldiers found one of them things that
came down in the woods. Poor lad was driving it back to London, on one of those
little jeeps.'

'So he had a crash,' said Sam. 'Nothing in that. Road accidents happening all the
time.'

Meg leaned forward. 'His neck were broken, clean through.
And his rifle were beside him, the barrel all twisted. They say there was a look

of terrible fear on his face.'
Sam shivered. 'Lots of gossip,' he said uneasily. 'Old wives'
tales.'
Meg took another sip of tea. 'Maybe so. But I'm glad I never found one of those

things.'
'Lucky for anyone who did,' said Sam defiantly. 'You see, they'll be offering a

reward soon.'
'Maybe,' said Meg. 'And maybe you wouldn't live long enough to enjoy it.'
She finished her tea and stood up. 'Well, I'm off down the shop.' She gave Sam

a peck on the cheek, and put on her coat. Sam was staring into his tea mug, obviously
a very worried man. As she came out of the front door, Meg smiled to herself. She
knew well enough that her Sam was up to something. He'd been acting funny and
mysterious ever since that night in the woods. Well, maybe she'd managed to scare
some sense into him. Barney, Sam's old lurcher dog, was dozing in the front garden.
He wagged his tail, but couldn't be bothered to get up.

Back in the cottage Sam stood up, undecided. Course, it was just a lot of silly
gossip. Still, he couldn't keep that thing in the shed forever. Maybe it was time for a
little chat with those soldier boys.

Couldn't do any harm to sound them out. He might even drop one or two hints.

In the UNIT Command Tent, Captain Munro looked with concern at the terrified
figure on the other side of the trestle table.

Ransome's hands were shaking so much that he had to clasp the mug of strong
army tea with both hands. His teeth chattered against the rim of the mug as he drank.

Munro said gently: 'I'm sorry, sir, but the story isn't all that clear. You broke into
the factory, and someone tried to kill you?'

Ransome made a mighty effort. 'Not some one. Some thing. A creature. There
were lots of them. They must be making them in the factory. No proper eyes... no
hair... a lumpy face... it came after me.'



Ransome began to shiver uncontrollably.
'It's all right, you're safe now,' said Munro soothingly. 'Now then, you say it had

a gun?'
Ransome spluttered with the effort to explain the horror he had seen. 'Not had

a gun... the gun was part of it... its hand just fell away, hung there...' He looked at
Munro wildly, as if begging him to understand and believe him.

Munro came to a decision. 'Look, sir, all this is a bit above my head. I'd like you
to tell this story to my Brigadier. He'll know how to handle things.'

Munro raised his voice. 'Sergeant! I want this man taken to UNIT H.Q., right
away.'

Liz Shaw and the Doctor were bent over the tray of meteorite fragments. The
Doctor moved the scanning equipment gently across the surface. Liz said, 'Are you
getting a reading?'

The Doctor shook his head. 'Nothing.'
'Right, that's it, then,' said Liz in some disgust. 'We've tried every test and, except

that we think it's some kind of totally unknown plastic, we've got nowhere.'
The Doctor shrugged. 'Well, we did our best. After all, with this primitive

equipment they've given us...'
Liz gestured round the laboratory. 'Primitive? Come on now, Doctor, that's not

really fair. We've got lasers, spectographs, micron probes.'
The Doctor sniffed disparagingly. 'What we really need is a lateral molecular

rectifier. That'd give us the answer in no time.'
'And what on earth is a lateral molecular thingummy?'
'Nothing on Earth, unfortunately. But I've got one in the TARDIS.'

'You really do keep your scientific equipment in that old police box?'
The Doctor looked at her solemnly. 'My dear young lady, you simply wouldn't

believe what I keep in there.'
'All right, then,' said Liz, 'get the thing out. We've tried everything else.'
The Doctor looked crestfallen. 'The trouble is the—er, box is still locked. And

the Brigadier refuses to part with the key.' He looked at Liz hopefully. 'You might
be able to persuade him.'

In his office, the Brigadier was listening with mounting incredulity to Harry
Ransome's story. Ransome was calmer now, more coherent. He went over the whole
story from his first visit to America, to his final escape from the Auton. When he
was finished Ransome sat back and took a deep breath. He looked at the Brigadier
ruefully. 'Don't believe a word of it, do you? Can't say I blame you.'

Embarrassed, the Brigadier fiddled with a little key on his desk blotter.
'Now, I didn't say that, Mr. Ransome. As a matter of fact we, at UNIT, are

particularly interested in that part of the world.'
There was a tap on the door and the Brigadier looked up as Liz Shaw entered.

'Excuse me,' she said with a glance at the visitor.
The Brigadier was irritated at the interruption. Time the girl learned some

discipline. She was in UNIT now. 'Not now, Miss Shaw.'
'This is rather urgent. You see, the Doctor thinks—'



The Brigadier was outraged. 'Miss Shaw, your work in the laboratory is only a
small part of a very complex operation. Mr.

Ransome has come to me with a very interesting story, and I want to hear it
without interruptions.'

Ignoring Liz, the Brigadier rose and pointed to a wall-map.
'Now exactly where is this plastics factory of yours?'
Ransome peered at the map, and then said: 'Just there.'
The Brigadier nodded. 'Exactly. Close to the borders of Oxley Woods. Some

very funny things have been happening there.'

The two men had turned their backs on Liz to study the map.
She was left standing in the doorway, furious at her abrupt dismissal.
Suddenly she saw the little key on the desk. Without a word, she snatched it up

and swept from the room, slamming the door behind her with a crash that shook the
room.

The Brigadier winced, then resumed his place behind the desk.
'Now then, Mr. Ransome, let's just run through the main points of this story of

yours again.'

Liz stormed into the laboratory, and thrust the little key into the Doctor's hand.
'Of all the pompous, overbearing idiots,' she said furiously, 'that Brigadier takes the
biscuit!'

The Doctor looked at the key in amazement. 'He gave it to you—just like that?'
'Not exactly. I took it.'
'Oh dear,' said the Doctor. 'I'm afraid he's going to be very cross with you.'
Taking the key from her hand, he looked at her with a worried frown. He glanced

from the tray of meteorite fragments to the TARDIS and then back at Liz. He seemed
torn by indecision.

'Hadn't you better get on with it?' said Liz.
The Doctor sighed. 'Yes, I'm afraid I had. Thank you, my dear.
Goodbye.'
The Doctor crossed to the TARDIS and slipped the key in the lock. The door

opened and the Doctor stepped inside, closing the door behind him.
Liz looked at the closed door in amazement, waiting for the Doctor to emerge.

Why had he said goodbye like that? Suddenly she heard a strange groaning and
wheezing coming from the TARDIS. It was like the sound of some powerful but rather
ancient engine creaking into life.

That sound reached the Brigadier in his office. He looked down at his desk,
registered the absence of the key. To Ransome's astonishment he gave a bellow of
rage and ran from the room.

The groaning and roaring was still going on as the Brigadier dashed into the
laboratory. The TARDIS was shuddering and vibrating now. Liz had backed away
from it and was watching in astonishment.

'The key,' spluttered the Brigadier, raising his voice above the din. 'You gave it
to the Doctor?'

Liz nodded. 'He said he kept some vital equipment in there.'



'Equipment?' roared the Brigadier. 'You little idiot! He's escaped! We shan't see
him again.'

The roar of the TARDIS rose to a shattering crescendo. 'There you are,' shouted
the Brigadier. 'He's going!'

Suddenly there was a loud bang from inside the TARDIS. The groaning noise
subsided, the TARDIS door flew open, and a cloud of smoke billowed out. In the
middle of the smoke appeared the Doctor, coughing and choking. He waved his
handkerchief to clear the smoke and then spotted the Brigadier and Liz. He gave them
a rather sheepish smile, and closed the TARDIS door.

'I was just testing, you know. Just testing.'
'Doctor, you tricked me,' said Liz accusingly.
The Doctor sighed. 'I'm afraid I did, my dear. Please forgive me. The temptation

was very strong. You see, I suddenly couldn't bear the thought of being tied to one
time-zone and one planet.' He turned to the Brigadier. 'Sorry, old chap. I won't do
it again.'

'You certainly won't,' said the Brigadier grimly. 'Give me that key, Doctor.'
'Must I?' said the Doctor plaintively. 'As you saw, the TARDIS
isn't working any more.'
He looked so unhappy that the Brigadier couldn't help feeling sorry for him. He

cleared his throat and said gruffly: 'Well—if you give me your word not to try and
escape again.'

The Doctor sank despondently on to a stool. 'I couldn't escape now if I wanted
to—not in the TARDIS. They've changed my dematerialisation code.'

'Who's changed what?'
'The Time Lords. Oh, the despicable, underhanded lot!' said the Doctor

indignantly.

'You can talk,' said Liz. She hadn't entirely forgiven the Doctor his trickery.
Hastily, the Doctor turned to the Brigadier. 'Well now, about this little problem

of yours. Miss Shaw and I have come to a dead end, I'm afraid.'
'It's because we haven't got a lateral molecular rectifier, you see,' said Liz, with

a look at the Doctor.
'A what?' said the Brigadier. 'I told you I can get you any equipment you need.'
'Just a little joke,' said the Doctor hastily. 'The thing is, we need something more

to work on.'
'I think I may be able to provide it for you,' said the Brigadier,
'Will you both come to my office, please? There's someone I'd like you to talk

to. We're all going to take a little trip down to Essex, to visit a plastics factory.'

8



The Auton Attacks
Sam Seeley shuffled his feet uneasily, twisting his old cloth cap between his

fingers. His gaze wandered all round the tent, trying to avoid the sceptical eyes of the
young officer behind the table.

Munro said sharply: 'Come on now, Mr. Seeley, you're wasting my time. Have
you got something to tell me, or haven't you?'

'I'm only trying to help, like,' said Sam vaguely. 'You see, I knows these woods,
like, knows every rabbit-hole.'

'Poacher, are you?'
'Let's just say I'm self-employed.'
'I'm still trying to work out why you came to see me.'
Sam groaned inwardly. This conversation wasn't going at all the way he'd

imagined it. No one seemed at all interested in his subtle hints. All he was getting was
a lot of uncomfortably direct questions.

He tried again. 'See, if I knew a bit about what you was looking for...' Munro's
voice was stern. 'I'm afraid I can't tell you that, Mr. Seeley. But I can tell you this.
The objects we're searching for are extremely dangerous. One man has been killed
already.'

Sam made a final try. 'I reckon it'd be worth a fair bit of money—if anyone did
happen to know where he could put his hand on one?'

Munro leaned forward. 'It'd be worth quite a long spell in prison for someone
withholding information, if someone did know where to find one, and didn't inform
us. Of course, if that someone came forward like a public-spirited citizen—well, there
might possibly be some question of a small reward. Some kind of finder's fee.'

Sam brightened immediately. Even a small reward was better than nothing. He
pulled up one of the wooden chairs and sat down, leaning forward confidentially.
'Well, it were like this, you see... I were checking me traps last night in Oxley Woods
when all of a sudden...'

When Sam's wife returned from her shopping the little cottage was silent and
empty. She wasn't particularly surprised. Her Sam was in the habit of appearing and
disappearing as the fancy took him. She went out of the back door and called: 'Sam,
Sam, you out there!'

There was no answer. On impulse she went down the garden and opened the
shed door. No Sam. She was about to shut the door and go back to the house, when
she saw the tin trunk under Sam's workbench. She remembered how oddly Sam had
behaved before.

On a sudden impulse, she pulled the trunk from beneath the bench and opened it.
This time it wasn't empty. Something round was in the bottom, wrapped in a

sheet of her kitchen foil. She smiled in satisfaction and set about unwrapping it. With
the kitchen foil removed, she saw a dull green globe, made of something heavy and
smooth. It was about the size of a football. She popped it back inside and began to
drag the trunk back to the house. Once she had the trunk in the cottage's tiny sitting-
room, she opened it again. The globe began to glow softly.

Then it started to pulse with light. The pulsing increased in brightness and
intensity until the globe was flashing rhythmically.



Meg leaned forward, staring at it as if hypnotised.
In the woods a waiting Auton came to life. It swung its body from side to side,

searching for the direction of the signal. Then it began to move forward, heading
straight for the cottage.

In the security area of the plastics factory a light flashed on a monitor panel. The
light flashed in exactly the same pulsing rhythm as the globe. Channing and Hibbert
stood watching.

'Less than two miles away,' said Channing with satisfaction.
'We have found the swarm leader at last.'
'Aren't you going to collect it?' asked Hibbert.
'That is already being done.' Channing's eyes narrowed. His consciousness was

linked to that of the Auton. He could see what it saw, hear what it heard. 'There—
that little building. That is where the swarm leader is being held!' Channing's voice
was exultant. He stood rigid and motionless, as if in a trance. Hibbert looked at him
in horrified fascination. Channing said softly: 'We are nearly there.' His eyes stared
blankly into the distance.

The Auton continued its relentless progress. In the distance it saw the cottage
appear through the trees.

Meg suddenly shook her head, as if freeing herself from the hypnotic influence of
the glowing sphere. Suddenly she slammed shut the lid, cutting off the flashing light.
Then she began to drag the trunk out of the sitting-room. Let Sam keep the nasty thing
in the shed if he wanted to, decided Meg. She wasn't going to have it in her house.

As the speeding UNIT car reached the edge of the woods, the Brigadier told the
driver: 'Take us to the Command Post first. I'll let Captain Munro know we're here;
see if there's any news.'

In the back seat of the car sat Liz, the Doctor and Ransome.
Ransome had become increasingly silent as they came nearer to the scene of his

terrifying experience.
Liz gave him an encouraging pat on the arm. 'No need to worry, this time, Mr.

Ransome,' she said. 'You won't be going back alone. The Brigadier can pick up some
troops to go with us.'

Ransome looked ashamed. 'I'm beginning to think I can't face going back at all,'
he confessed. 'I thought I was going to be all right, now, but it all seems to be coming
back to me. It's as if they were still watching me.' There was the sound of panic in
his voice.

The car was jolting down the forest track now, and they saw the tent with the
UNIT sentry outside. The car came to a halt, the sentry saluted and Munro emerged
from the tent.

Before the Brigadier could say anything, Munro spoke excitedly. 'This is
marvellous, sir, you've turned up just in time. I've got a chap in here who actually
found one of the meteorites. A whole one. He's been keeping it in a trunk in his shed!'

Sam Seeley was somewhat taken aback when a whole group of people poured
into the tent. His eyes widened when he saw the Doctor. But Sam made no mention
of having seen the arrival of the TARDIS. He reckoned he was in enough trouble.
Anyway, who'd believe him? This tall chap was one of the nobs. When Sam, rather



shamefaced, had told his story again, the Brigadier snapped: 'Captain Munro, do you
know where this man's cottage is?'

Munro turned to an Ordnance Survey map spread out on the table. 'It's here, sir.
Just a few minutes away.'

'Right, you'd better come with us.'
Liz noticed Ransome. He'd followed them from the car, and was hanging about

on the edge of the group, looking completely confused. 'Perhaps I could wait here,'
he said.

Munro noticed Ransome for the first time. 'Yes of course. My chaps will look
after you. Sergeant, get Mr. Ransome some tea.'

Munro grabbed Sam by the arm. 'Come along, man. We need you to show us
where the thing is.'

Munro and the Brigadier crammed into the front seat of the car, next to the driver,
while Liz, the Doctor and Sam Seeley sat in the back. The car jolted off down the
track, heading for the road.

Sam looked round approvingly at the padded comfort of the Brigadier's staff car.
'Very kind of you gentlemen to give me a lift home,' he said amiably. 'Beats riding
my old bike.' Nobody answered, and Sam fell silent.

The cottage that they were making for stood still and silent. An Auton stepped
from the forest and walked towards the cottage gate.

Barney was still stretched out in the little front garden. He raised his head and
growled at the approaching figure.

In the shed at the end of the garden Meg gave the trunk a final shove back under
the workbench and stood up, dusting her hands.

She stopped a moment, listening. How silent everything had become.
Even the birds seemed to have stopped singing. From the house came the long

drawn out howl of a dog.
Meg yelled: 'Barney, just you stop that racket.'
The dog howled again, on a rising note of terror. Uneasy, Meg moved towards

the house. 'Just you shut up that racket now, Barney.'
There was yet another howl, cut short by a sudden yelp. Then silence. Meg stood

listening for what seemed ages. Suddenly she heard the sound of smashing glass and
splintering wood. Meg ran towards the house. She came into the little parlour and
stopped in amazement.

The little room was a complete wreck. Chairs and table were broken, a dresser
smashed open. A giant figure, its back turned, was rooting through the contents of a
corner cupboard, searching with a sort of savage ferocity.

Meg was too indignant at the total wreck of her home to feel frightened. 'Hey,
you!' she yelled. 'What you think you're at, then?

Just you get out of here!'
The figure swung round and looked at her, and Meg gave a gasp of terror. The

face was blank and smooth, the features crude and lumpy.
Meg whispered hoarsely: 'Now just you get out. My husband's about, you know.'

But she knew as she spoke that the creature couldn't hear or understand her. Slowly
she backed away. Then turning she ran through the little passage and out of the back
door.

Snatching the key from the lock, she closed the door and locked it from the
outside. Then she ran down the garden path to Sam's shed.



Sam's old shotgun was in its usual place, hanging above the shed door. She
grabbed it and broke it open.

There was a shattering crash from the house. Meg looked up.
The back door had been burst completely from its hinges. Framed in the

doorway, stood the Auton. For a moment it just stood there, watching her. Then it
started to walk down the garden path. Meg raised the gun and pulled the trigger. There
was a dry click. Of course. Sam never left the gun loaded. Meg searched frantically
on the shelf by the shed door and found an open box of cartridges. With trembling
hands, she broke open the gun and loaded it. Snapping the gun shut, she looked up.
The Auton was almost upon her.

She levelled the gun. 'Now, you saw me load it,' she said shakily. 'You get away
from here or I'll blow a hole in you.' The Auton continued to advance.

'I mean it! I'm not fooling, you know.' The Auton was almost within arm's length
now. Meg raised the shotgun and fired, first one barrel and then the other. The Auton
was rocked backwards by the blast. It recoiled a few paces, and Meg could see the
smoking holes in the breast of its rough overalls. Then it began to walk forward again.
There was no change in the expression of the blank face. Meg screamed once more.
Then she fainted. The Auton stepped over her and went into the shed.

Channing's face was a mask of fierce concentration. He hissed:
'The signal is muffled but it is near now. It is very near. We must find it. We

must find it.'

Everythingwas quiet as the Brigadier's staff car drew up outside the little cottage.
Everyone climbed out of the car and Sam lead the way inside.

'Meg!' he called. 'Meg, we got company.' He stopped appalled as he saw the
wreckage all round him.

'I think we may be too late,' said the Doctor. Suddenly they heard a bumping
noise from the garden. The Brigadier and Munro drew their revolvers. Followed by
the others, they ran through the wrecked cottage and out of the shattered back door.

Meg's body lay crumpled at the side of the shed. The Auton was carrying the
tin trunk up the path. Before anyone could stop him, Sam Seeley pushed his way to
Meg's side. Ignoring the Auton, he picked up his wife and began carrying her out of
danger. The Auton looked up, seeming to sense that it was watched. It dropped the
trunk and raised an arm, pointing at the Brigadier. The hand dropped on its hinge. A
nozzle appeared, projecting from the wrist.

'Down!' yelled the Doctor. 'Everybody down!' He gave the Brigadier and Munro
a shove, grabbed Liz and hurled her back inside the building.

An energy-bolt sizzled over the Brigadier's head, blasting a hole in the brick wall
of the cottage. The Brigadier and Munro took cover, Munro behind a coal bunker,
the Brigadier round the angle of the wall. Both opened fire at once with their heavy
service revolvers.

The Auton reeled and staggered under the impact of the bullets; but it continued
to return the fire, sending bolt after bolt of energy from its wrist-gun. '

From his position in the doorway, the Doctor yelled:
'Brigadier, Captain Munro! Hold your fire!' The guns became silent.



The Auton too stopped firing, moving its gun slowly from side to side. Speaking
clearly and distinctly the Doctor called: 'The platoon must be nearly here. We'll
capture it when they arrive.'

In the plastics factory Channing's face twisted with anger.
'Recall,' he hissed. 'Recall, recall!'
At his elbow Hibbert said nervously, 'What's happening?'
Channing said: 'UNIT. Too many of them. It is too soon for a pitched battle.'

At the cottage the little group watched in amazement as the Auton wheeled
suddenly and made off through the woods. The Brigadier moved as if to pursue, but
the Doctor stopped him. 'Let it go, Brigadier. If you caught it, you couldn't harm it.
And it would certainly kill you.'

'What's all this about a relief platoon, Doctor? I didn't order any troops to follow
us.'

The Doctor smiled. 'You and I know that. But it didn't.' He gestured in the
direction of the Auton's retreat. 'You think that thing actually understood you?'

'Maybe not the thing itself. I think it was just a sort of walking weapon. But
whoever is controlling it understood me.'

Forestalling any more questions, the Doctor said: 'Now let's take a look at what
it came for.'

The Brigadier looked at Liz, who was helping Sam to revive Mrs. Seeley. 'How
is she?'

'Just shock, I think. We ought to get her to hospital.'
The Brigadier said: 'Munro, call an ambulance!'
AsMrs. Seeley was helped inside the cottage, Sam said: 'I'll want compensation!

Look at all this damage! And what about my reward?'
Exasperated, the Brigadier turned on him. 'By making off with that meteorite,

Mr. Seeley, you brought all of this upon yourself, and gravely hampered my
investigations. As for a reward—you and your wife are both still alive and relatively
unharmed. Isn't that reward enough?'

Chastened, Sam followed the Brigadier into the cottage. After all, he thought
hopefully, there was always the newspapers. A story like his ought to be worth a
bob or two. Sam could already see the headlines—'MY STRUGGLE WITH THE
MONSTER'. Still scheming hopefully, he followed the Brigadier into the cottage.

Liz joined the Doctor who was peering into the trunk.
'Fascinating!' he said. 'Quite fascinating. I was right about the size and shape,

you see.'
Liz looked at the sphere. It was still pulsing, though now in a more subdued

rhythm. The Doctor indicated the silver foil at the bottom of the trunk. 'He'd got it
wrapped in this, you see. Aluminium foil. That, and the metal of the trunk, must have
muffled the signals.'

'And when that poor woman took it out, it started calling for help! Hadn't you
better wrap it up again?'

Deftly, the Doctor began to wrap the sphere in the kitchen foil.
'I think perhaps you're right.'
'Suppose the thing explodes, like the other one?'



The Doctor closed the lid of the trunk. 'There's no reason why it should, if we
treat it gently. That is, unless it's got a built-in self-destruct impulse. Still, we'll just
have to risk that.' And he beamed cheerfully at Liz.

'Doctor,' said Liz, 'you'll have to unwrap that thing and take it out of the trunk
if we're going to work on it in the laboratory.'

'Yes, of course we will.' The Doctor swung the trunk on to his shoulder and
started to carry it towards the car.

'Well,' said Liz, 'what do we do if that thing decides to come back and get it?'
The Doctor chuckled. 'That, my dear, is a very good question.'
Munro came out of the cottage. 'The ambulance is here, sir.
Seeley's going with his wife to the hospital.'
The Brigadier nodded, and turned to the Doctor. 'Well, Doctor? What do we do

now?'

It was curious, thought Liz, how the Doctor seemed to have assumed command.
Or maybe it wasn't strange, she thought. There was something very reassuring about
the Doctor.

He rubbed his chin thoughtfully. 'Well, it's pretty obvious where that creature
came from. Obviously something very similar attacked Ransome at the plastics
factory.'

'Right,' said the Brigadier crisply. 'I'll move in at once.'
The Doctor shook his head. 'And maybe face an army of those creatures? Until

we know a little more about what's going on, we'd better move cautiously.'
'Then what do we do?'
The Doctor said: 'First we send this trunk back to UNIT H.Q., under armed

guard.'
Munro stepped forward. 'I'll see to it right away, Doctor.'
'Mind,' said the Doctor warningly, 'no one's to open that trunk until I arrive.'
'I doubt if anyone will want to!' said Munro.
The Doctor turned to the Brigadier. 'Now I think we should collect Mr. Ransome

from your Command Post, and pay a nice friendly visit to that plastics factory.'

Channing paced up and down in silent fury. 'We must recover the swarm leader,'
he said angrily.

'But if UNIT has taken it—and you don't want a pitched battle yet—how can
we?' said Hibbert.

Channing said: 'There are other methods.' Suddenly he noticed the monitor
screen. Ransome's brain-print pattern had reappeared and was pulsing brightly.
Channing said with savage satisfaction: 'Your friend Ransome has been unwise
enough to return to the area. Him at least we can deal with now!'

Alone in theUNITCommandTent, Ransome swigged the last of hismug of now-
cold tea. Hewas feeling tired and depressed. The idea of re-visiting the plastics factory
terrified him, even with the prospect of the Brigadier's protection. And now he'd just
been dumped here and left while they all rushed off somewhere hunting meteorites.
Still at least he was safe for the moment. Ransome could hear the soldiers moving
about in the clearing outside, and the bark of the Sergeant's voice as he supervised



the unloading of stores from an army truck. Ransome was bored. He wished that the
Sergeant would come back, so he'd have someone to talk to.

Something bumped against the canvas at the back of the tent.
Ransome looked up idly, assuming that one of the soldiers had brushed against

it. Then to his amazement a long rip appeared in the canvas wall. A figure stepped
through it. Ransome leaped to his feet in utter terror. Facing him was an Auton.

Before Ransome could even scream, the hand dropped back on its hinge and a
searing bolt of energy smashed him to the ground.

The Auton trained its gun on the body and a beam of bright light shot from the
wrist-gun. Ransome's body glowed red then white, and then simply vanished. The
Auton stepped through the rip in the canvas as silently as it had come.

Minutes later the Brigadier's car drew up at the Command Post. Munro gave
orders for sending the trunk to UNIT H.Q. The Doctor, Liz Shaw and the Brigadier
entered the tent. They looked round in puzzlement.

The Brigadier yelled: 'Sergeant! Where's Mr. Ransome gone to!' The Sergeant
appeared in the tent doorway.

'Nowhere, sir, not as far as I know. I left him in here drinking tea. I had to go
out and get the supply truck unloaded.'

The Doctor was looking swiftly round the tent. Almost at once he spotted the
slash in the tent wall.

'We can only presume he got out this way.'
'But why?' asked the Brigadier aggrievedly. 'Why should the chap just slope off

like that?'
'He was pretty scared about the idea of going back to that factory,' Liz said

thoughtfully. 'Maybe he decided he just couldn't face it.'
The Doctor moved away from the tent wall. 'We're all assuming he got out.

Maybe something else got in.'

'Somebody kidnapped him—from my Command Post?' The Brigadier was
appalled at the very thought.

The Doctor shrugged. 'After all, Ransome's story was our only link with the
factory. If Mr. Ransome's anywhere, that's where he'll be.'

As the car sped towards the factory, the Doctor sat chin in his hands, brooding.
Liz sensed that his mind was turning over all that had happened, trying to find a
pattern, a reason. He was still silent as they drove through the open gates, with the
sign 'Auto Plastics' on them.

'They don't seem to object to visitors,' said Liz as they got out of the car.
'No, they wouldn't,' said the Doctor absently. 'They'd want to keep everything

looking fairly normal. Right up till the last moment, that is.'
Liz looked at him curiously, but by now they were in the luxuriously furnished

reception. The Brigadier explained his business to the pretty, rather doll-like girl
receptionist. He was obviously prepared to over-ride all opposition. But there wasn't
any.

'Mr. Hibbert will see you now,' said the receptionist in her clear emotionless
voice. 'Will you come this way please?' It was almost as if they'd had an appointment,
thought Liz. As if they'd been expected.



She looked round curiously as they crossed the deserted factory floor. This was
very advanced machinery, fully automated.

The Brigadier stopped for a moment, looking over his shoulder. Liz followed
his gaze, and thought she saw someone moving behind one of the machines. Then
the Brigadier murmured an apology, and they moved on. The girl took them up to the
staircase that led to Hibbert's office, showed them inside, and silently withdrew.

Liz looked curiously at George Hibbert as he rose from behind his desk. He
looked very like the average business executive anywhere. Dark striped suit, horn-
rimmed glasses, greying hair.

There were lines of strain and worry on the face, but no more than on the faces
of many other businessmen.

Hibbert settled them all in chairs and then sat down behind his desk. He listened
politely as the Brigadier introduced Liz and the Doctor, and explained the reason for
their visit. The Brigadier gave a brief summary of the story Ransome had told them.
His voice tailed away rather as he came to the end of it.

'And—er—well, there you are. You will appreciate that extraordinary as the
story is, we have to check on it.'

Hibbert looked politely puzzled. 'Well, if you say so, Brigadier. Though I would
have thought that it was more a matter for a psychiatrist than a security man.'

'You mean that Ransome was unbalanced?'
'That, or simply malicious.'
Liz said: 'So there was no truth in this story at all?'
'Well, there was some. It's true that he used to work for me. It's also true that he

designed a new type of electronic doll. It was a brilliant invention but far too complex
and expensive for the mass-market. When I refused to produce it here, he went off to
America in a huff to try and find backing.'

'And succeeded apparently,' cut in the Brigadier.
'So he told me. But the fact that others were prepared to risk their money didn't

mean that I was prepared to risk mine. My attitude hadn't changed and I told him so.
He seemed to feel I'd let him down.

He became violently abusive and I had to ask him to leave.'
'So you think he made up this whole story just to cause you trouble?'
'I'm afraid so, Brigadier.'
'But why should he tell such a fantastic story?'
Hibbert shrugged. 'Why don't you ask him? I'd very, much like to ask him that

myself.'
'We were going to bring him with us,' said Liz. 'Unfortunately he disappeared

before we set off.'
'I'm not surprised! Didn't dare to repeat all this nonsense to my face.'

The Doctor spoke for the first time. 'What exactly do you make in this factory,
Mr. Hibbert?'

'I'd be delighted to show you. Perhaps you'd care to have a look at our store-
rooms?'

The first room Hibbert took them to was lined with shelf after shelf of plastic
dolls. Dolls with hair of every colour, dolls of every shape and size. Row upon row
of china-blue eyes gazed at them unwinkingly from shiny pink plastic faces. Liz



shivered. Somehow there was something rather sinister about so many of the little
creatures in one place.

Hibbert waved his arm in a sweeping gesture. 'This was our original line, of
course. However, since then we've broken into new territory. If you'd come through
here.'

He took them into another, larger store-room. It seemed to be full of a huge
crowd of silent figures, standing and waiting. Hibbert switched on a light.

'This is our big success at themoment. Displaymannequins for department stores
and shop windows.'

Liz looked round. Row after row of impossibly handsome men and beautiful
women. If possible, they were even more sinister than the dolls.

The Doctor said: 'And do these, er... mannequins move?'
Hibbert smiled. 'Of course they do.' He went up to the nearest mannequin and

shifted its position. Arms and legs and bodymoved easily, and stayed as theywere put.
'It's fortunate you came today. These will all be gone by tomorrow.' Hibbert

put the the mannequin back in its place. 'As you can see,' he said proudly, 'they're
extremely supple and flexible. But I can assure you they don't move by themselves.
We call them Autons, after the name of the factory—"Auto Plastics".'

The Brigadier coughed. 'Most impressive. Well, we mustn't take up any more of
your time, Mr. Hibbert.'

As Hibbert led them back across the factory floor towards the reception area, the
Doctor asked: 'These Autons of yours—they're selling well?'

Hibbert nodded proudly. 'You'll find our Autons in every big department store
in every city in England.'

Suddenly the Doctor stopped. He pointed across the factory floor to the area
marked 'Restricted Zone'. 'I don't believe you've shown us what goes on in there, Mr.
Hibbert?'

'And I'm afraid I can't.' Hibbert turned to the Brigadier.
'Confidentially, Brigadier, we do a certain amount of work for the Ministry of

Technology. Research into heat-resistant plastic for the space programme. Unless you
and your party have specialMinistry passes...' Hibbert shrugged apologetically. 'Well,
I'm sure you, more than most people, will appreciate the necessity for good security.'

'And if I should get hold of a Ministry pass and come back here?'
'Then I'd be more than happy to show you the Research Laboratory. Though,

mind you, I don't understand half of what's in there myself. My partner, Mr. Channing,
handles that side of our work.'

The Brigadier said: 'It's a pity we didn't get a chance to meet him.'
'Yes, indeed,' agreed Hibbert. 'Unfortunately he's away on a buying trip at the

moment.' By now they were back in the reception area. Hibbert said: 'Well, if there's
nothing more, gentlemen?'

The Brigadier glanced at the Doctor, who gave an almost imperceptible shake
of his head.

'No, I don't think so,' said the Brigadier. 'Thank you for all your help. I hope we
won't have to trouble you again.'

Hibbert said: 'Goodbye, Brigadier, Miss Shaw, Doctor. Let me know if I can be
of any further assistance.' He watched as the three visitors got into the car and were
driven away.



Hibbert turned and walked back into the factory area.
Suddenly he seemed to sag, as if exhausted after some mighty effort.
Charming appeared from behind the machinery and stood beside him.
'One of the visitors puzzled me. His brain was more powerful than most humans.'

Hibbert said: 'You mean the Scientific Adviser? Probably an exceptionally
intelligent chap.'

'You did well, Hibbert. You did very well.'
'Do you think they were satisfied?'
'They are still suspicious. But they have no proof. It will take them time to move

against us.'
'If they're not satisfied, they'll come back with more soldiers.
They'll search in there.' Hibbert glanced towards the restricted zone.
'We have a way to stop them,' Channing reminded him. 'All we need is a short

delay. When the time comes, no amount of soldiers will help them.'
The two of them began to walk towards the Replica Room.

As the staff car sped back towards London the Brigadier was saying: 'Well, that's
the place all right. I caught a glimpse of someone skulking about on the factory floor.
It was the chap who tried to kidnap you, Doctor.'

The Doctor nodded. 'Caught a glimpse of himmyself. The elusiveMr. Channing,
no doubt. Yes, I think that creature at the cottage was one of their Autons.'

Liz asked: 'What are you going to do now?'
The Brigadier was decisive. 'Move in in force. Put a cordon of troops round the

factory, then search the place from top to bottom.'
'Suppose it's full of Autons—like the one that attacked us at the cottage?'
The Brigadier snorted. 'Well, revolver bullets didn't bother that thing much. But

we'll see if they can laugh off bazookas or light artillery. Dammit, I'll bomb the place
if I have to!'

The Brigadier's moustache positively bristled with military fervour. 'Old Scobie
promised me full co-operation,' he went on, 'and I'm going to take him up on it.'

'Why do you have to go to him?' asked Liz.
'UNIT itself only maintains a small token force,' the Brigadier explained. 'For

any really big operation we have to ask the Regulars for help.'

Liz turned to the Doctor who was slumped deep in his corner, chin in hands.
'You're very quiet, Doctor. Do you think the Brigadier should invade in force?'

The Doctor looked up. 'Wheel in your big guns by all means, Brigadier. Wemust
close that factory just as soon as we can.'

'Then what are you looking so worried about?' asked Liz.
The Doctor sighed. 'I think we may be underestimating our enemy,' he said.

'Something tells me it isn't going to be so simple.'
And he relapsed into silence.
As soon as they were back at UNIT H.Q., the Doctor seemed to revive. The tin

trunk was waiting for them at the laboratory, and the Doctor immediately set about
rigging up a complicated set of aerials and dials around it.



'To jam its signals,' he explained. Then he carefully took the globe and
unwrapped it, fixing it on a specially rigged-up stand. At once the globe began to
pulse angrily.

'No good having a tantrum, old chap,' the Doctor told it reprovingly. 'You'll just
have to talk to us.'

'What do we do with it now?' asked Liz. 'Sit and admire it?'
'Didn't you hear what I said?' asked the Doctor. 'We're going to try and

communicate with it. And test its strength.'

The Brigadier meanwhile was talking to General Scobie on the telephone. He
told him all that had happened: the attack at the cottage, Ransome's disappearance,
the visit to the plastics factory.

Scobie was baffled, but co-operative.
'Auto Plastics,' he said incredulously. 'I was down there myself earlier today,' and

rather diffidently he explained about the replica of him that was being made. 'Still,'
he went on, 'that's neither here nor there. You can bank on me for all the co-operation
you need.' The General glanced at his watch. 'It'll take a bit of time to set up, though.

Tell you what, Lethbridge-Stewart, I'll get cracking right away. I can set up the
mobilisation overnight, and we'll move in first thing tomorrow.'

'Couldn't be better, sir. Thank you again,' said the Brigadier.

'Right,' said Scobie, 'I'll be in touch with you about liaison.
Good night, Brigadier.'
Scobie put down the 'phone and sighed. Extraordinary business. Still that's what

the Brigadier and his chaps were for, to deal with things like this. Scobie had a flash
of regret for the days when soldiering was simpler. A nice straight-forward cavalry
charge, now! Nothing to beat it. He was just about to pick up the 'phone and call his
H.Q., when the doorbell rang.

General Scobie heaved an exasperated sigh. He'd been looking forward to a quiet
evening with his collection of regimental memoirs.

Who the devil could this be?
Scobie went to the door of the little mews flat and opened it.
At the sight of the figure facing him, he fell back in horrified disbelief. Another

General Scobie stood there looking at him impassively. As his other self bore down on
him, he took a faltering step backward. The other General Scobie stepped after him.

Channing appeared behind the second Scobie. 'Good evening, General,' he said.
'As I promised, I have brought your replica to see you.'

Channing and the second Scobie stepped into the flat, pushing the General before
them. The door closed. There was a muffled, gurgling scream, and then silence.



Scobie fell back in horrified disbelief. Another General Scobie stood there
looking at him impassively.

9



The Creatures in the Waxworks
Full of his plans for the coming attack, the Brigadier burst into the laboratory.
'Well, I've fixed it all up—' he began cheerfully. 'We're moving in—'
'Ssh!' said Liz, waving him into silence.
Rather hurt, the Brigadier subsided. He stood watching as Liz and the Doctor

surrounded the meteorite, or whatever the thing was, with a variety of complicated
looking apparatus.

'All right, my dear, is the oscillator connected?' said the Doctor.
Liz was fitting two complex pieces of circuitry together. 'Hang on... yes, okay

now.'
'Right. Switch on. I'll watch the graph.'
Liz flicked a switch and then turned a control knob. The apparatus began to give

out a low hum.
The Brigadier looked at Liz and the Doctor as they bent over their instruments.

He sighed, recognising that he hadn't a hope of understanding what they were up to.
No doubt they'd tell him when it suited them. And he was supposed to be the one in
command! Not for the first time the Brigadier considered applying for a transfer back
to normal regimental duties. Life had been so simple then.

Parades, inspections, manoeuvres, more parades... He'd been offered the UNIT
job not long after that Yeti business in the Underground.

Presumably because he was the only senior British officer with experience in
dealing with alien life-forms. At the time it had seemed like a rather cushy number,
carrying as it did the welcome promotion from Colonel to Brigadier. If only he'd
known! First that nasty affair with the Cybermen, and now this. The trouble with the
scientific approach, thought the Brigadier, was that it left you at the mercy of your
scientists.

Then he brightened. For all their scientific mumbo-jumbo it was direct military
action that was going to solve the problem. The Brigadier's eyes sparkled with
anticipation at the thought of tomorrow's attack on the plastics factory.

Encouraged by this thought, he cleared his throat loudly and said: 'Perhaps you
wouldn't mind telling me what you're actually trying to do, Doctor?'

The Doctor looked up. He gestured towards the green globe on its stand. The
thing was now beginning to pulse angrily. 'Well, it appears that in there we have what
one might loosely call a brain...'

The Doctor took a quick look at the quivering needle that was drawing spidery
lines on a recording graph. Fifty megacycles.'

Liz repeated: 'Fifty megacycles.' She turned the control knob a little further.
'Anything?' she asked.

The Doctor shook his head. 'No. Up another fifty, Liz.' As Liz adjusted her
controls again, the Doctor resumed his explanation.

'You see, Brigadier, we know it's emitting a signal of some kind. So if we can
establish the frequency on which it operates we may be able to counteract its—oh
dear!'



While the Doctor had been speaking, the hum of the apparatus had been rising
steadily higher. There was a puff of smoke, and a shower of sparks shot from the
apparatus. Hurriedly Liz switched off and stood back.

'I rather think we overloaded the circuit,' she said ruefully. She began to inspect
the apparatus. 'Yes, look! The thermionic valve's blown.' Liz began to disconnect part
of the apparatus.

'Now that really is interesting,' said the Doctor in a rather pleased tone. 'It means
that there must be an extremely high resistance on the...'

The Brigadier interrupted hastily: 'Doctor, you say that thing is some kind of a
brain?'

'Well, part of a brain. Or call it an intelligent entity. That's probably nearer the
mark.'

'And it's signalling somewhere? Where to?'
The Doctor gave him that patient look again. 'To the rest of itself. Surely that's

obvious?'

Liz looked up from her work on the apparatus. 'So the other globes that came
down—they're all part of one entity? Some kind of collective intelligence?'

The Doctor nodded. The Brigadier peered at the globe with a kind of revulsion.
He couldn't help feeling that it was peering back at him. 'Can it see us, or hear us?' he
asked, instinctively dropping his voice to a whisper.

The Doctor chuckled. 'My dear chap, it isn't sentient.'
'Our measurements show that there's no physical substance inside it,' said Liz.
'Probably gaseous ions held in a hetero-polar bond. Or something like that,' said

the Doctor, as if that made everything perfectly clear.
The Brigadier persisted. 'But it is alien—and dangerous?'
The Doctor looked at the globe thoughtfully. 'Well, it's an intelligent life-form,

and it isn't here by accident. I'm afraid we must assume that its intentions are hostile.'
'But if it has no physical form, how can it harm us?'
The Doctor said impatiently: 'Once here, it can presumably create for itself a

physical form, or even a number of them.
Otherwise there would have been no point in its coming.'
Liz said: 'A form like the thing at the cottage?'
'That's right. There may be other forms of it, too. Creatures we haven't even seen

yet.'
Liz shuddered. 'I'm not sure that I want to.'
The wall 'phone buzzed and the Brigadier picked it up. He said: 'Yes? Ah,

General Scobie... good, put him on.' He listened for a moment and then the familiar
voice of Scobie came on the line.

'Lethbridge-Stewart? About this raid on the plastics factory.
Not on, I'm afraid. They're doing important Government work, and they mustn't

be interfered with.'
The Brigadier could hardly believe his ears. 'But, sir, our investigations all point

to the fact that this factory is the centre...'
Scobie's voice cut in coldly: 'I'm sorry, Brigadier, but this is a direct order. Keep

away from that factory, or you'll find yourself in very serious trouble. By the way,
I'm recalling my men. They're urgently needed elsewhere.' There was a click and the
'phone went dead.



The Brigadier turned to the others, his face grim. 'That was General Scobie. He's
cancelled the raid on the factory.' The Doctor and Liz were busily re-assembling their
apparatus. The Doctor looked up.

'Well, you'll just have to go ahead without him, won't you?'
'Go ahead? How can I, without any troops?'
'What about all those men you had searching the woods,' asked Liz.
'They were regular army chaps. On loan from General Scobie.
Now he's withdrawn them all.'
The Brigadier began to pace the laboratory. 'Well, I'll just have to go over his

head. Get on to the Home Secretary. Make him revoke the order. If that doesn't work, I
can get on to UNITH.Q., in Geneva, and ask them to put pressure on the Government.'

The Doctor's face was grave. 'All that's going to take time—
and I've suddenly got a nasty feeling that time's running out on us.'
'How do you think the plastics factory people managed to get Scobie to change

his mind?' asked Liz. 'Have they got influence in high places?'
'No idea,' said the Brigadier disgustedly. 'Unless they managed to appeal to his

vanity with that replica business.'
The Doctor looked up keenly. 'Replica? What replica? Why didn't you tell me?'
'Didn't give memuch chance, did you?' said the Brigadier aggrievedly. 'Only just

heard about it myself.'
He told them about Scobie's earlier visit to the factory. About the special

exhibition of VIP's that was being held at a famous London waxworks.
The Doctor's face lit up. 'A waxworks. My goodness, a waxworks. Yes, of

course!' He glanced at the clock. 'Come on, Liz, we might just get there before they
close.' Almost dragging Liz after him, the Doctor rushed from the laboratory.

'Hey, wait! Just a moment,' the Brigadier called after them.
Then he shrugged his shoulders. Let them go to the waxworks. Let them go to

the Tower of London, Buckingham Palace and the London Zoo while they were at
it! And much good might it do them.

As usual all the real work was left to him. Like children, these scientists!
The Brigadier gave the glowing green sphere a final disgusted glare.

Malignantly, it flashed back at him. Then he left the laboratory and went down the
corridor to his office. Throwing himself into his chair, he snatched up the 'phone.

'Operator, this is Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart. Get me the Home Secretary on
the security line. I want to fix up an immediate appointment.'

Liz Shaw hung on to her seat as the Doctor raced the UNIT
jeep through the London traffic. He'd only been dissuaded from taking Mr.

Beavis's Rolls by her reminder that it was probably on the stolen cars list. But he was
getting quite a turn of speed out of the jeep.

'Nippy little things, these,' yelled the Doctor happily, as they took a corner on
two wheels, outraging a passing traffic-warden.

'Doctor, please,' yelled Liz. 'What's the rush? And did you ever pass a driving-
test?'

The Doctor was indignant. 'Of course I did! I'm a qualified rocket pilot on the
Mars to Venus route. And as for the rush—if we can get to the waxworks before
closing time, it'll save us the bother of breaking in!'



TheDoctor whizzed the jeep through a narrowing gap between two heavy lorries.
Liz shuddered and decided not to distract him with any more questions.

In a few minutes they arrived outside the waxworks. With a fine disregard for
regulations the Doctor parked the jeep on a double yellow line, and hared up the steps,
Liz following behind. There was still ten minutes to go till closing time. Liz went to
the ticket-box.

'Hardly worth going in now, is it?' said the old attendant at the main entrance,
as Liz showed him the tickets.

The Doctor beamed at him. 'Well, as a matter of fact, old chap, we just wanted
a very quick look at one particular exhibit—the special VIP room.'

The attendant seemed surprised. 'Don't get many asking for that, sir,' he said.
'Here, you come with me, I'll show you where it is.'

Liz and the Doctor followed him along the corridors. Most of the visitors were
going the other way, making for the exits. The old man took them to a small room,
set apart from the main displays. There was the usual raised platform with a silk rope
railing it off. On the platform stood a number of still figures. Most were of ordinary
looking men and women in business clothes, though one or two were in uniform.
Liz looked at the Doctor in puzzlement. Was this all they had come to see? But the
Doctor was looking round with keen interest. Apart from themselves the room was
completely empty.

'They don't seem very popular, do they?' he said cheerfully, turning to the old
attendant.

'Well, between you and me sir, this lot aren't,' said the old man.
'It's choice of subject if you ask me. I mean, look at 'em.' He waved round the

room. 'Top Civil Servants, one or two MPs, high-ranking blokes in the Army, Navy
and Air Force, even the Police. All very important ladies and gentlemen, I'm sure. But
—well, not a lot of glamour about them, you see. And the public must have glamour.'

The little old man nodded his bald head emphatically.
'They do seem rather a dull lot,' agreed Liz.
'Mind you,' said the attendant loyally, 'this new modelling process is marvellous,

no doubt about it. I mean, see for yourself.
Looks real, even feels real. Every detail perfect. Now if only they'd done a few

pop stars, or a decent murderer or two.'
'That wouldn't have been nearly so much use to them,' said the Doctor, almost to

himself. Ignoring the attendant's startled look, he said: 'I gather these waxworks aren't
made here—in fact, they're not really waxworks at all.'

'That's right, sir. Some factory down in the country do them.
Completely new process. Some new kind of plastic.'
'How do they come to be on display here?' asked Liz.

The old man's voice became confidential. 'Well, you see, miss, these people are
trying to break into the waxworks line. So they got on to us and offered to provide a
whole display completely free, just to see how the things went with the public. This
little room was empty, so we agreed. Between you and me, it hasn't been much of
a success.'

'On the contrary,' said the Doctor, 'I think it's been a great success.' He gave the
puzzled old man a charming smile. 'Is the display complete now?'



'Well, we thought it was. One more turned up today, though.
That's him over there.'
He pointed to a stiff uniformed figure at the end of the room.
Liz and the Doctor walked up to it.
'It's General Scobie!' said Liz.
'Just as I thought', said the Doctor. He turned to the attendant.
'Thank you so much for being so helpful. We mustn't keep you any more. I know

there's only a few more minutes, and you'll be busy closing up. We'll find our own
way out.'

'Right you are, sir,' said the attendant. 'You'll find an exit just over there.' And
he shuffled out of the room.

Liz turned back to the Doctor. 'What's so surprising about a replica of Scobie?
We knew they'd done one.'

But the Doctor wasn't listening. To Liz's astonishment, he swung his long legs
over the silk rope and climbed up on the platform. He began examining the model
of General Scobie. He tweaked its ear, looked into its eyes, and finally first peered
at, then listened to, the watch on the model's right wrist. Then he climbed back over
the rope.

'Liz, if you were making a model of someone, would you put a wristwatch on it?'
'I might—if it had to look completely authentic.'
'All right. Would you also go to the trouble of winding the watch up and setting

it to show the correct time and date?'
Liz looked at the model of Scobie, then back at the Doctor. 'I don't know,' she

said uneasily. 'What are you getting at?'

The Doctor indicated the rows of silent figures. 'All these models must be taken
into custody immediately. I'll want to examine them in the laboratory.'

'You can't arrest an entire waxworks display.'
' I can't, but the Brigadier can! Change for the telephone, please, Liz.' Urgently

the Doctor held out his hand.
Liz fished out some change and gave it to him. With a muttered 'Back in a

minute,' the Doctor rushed off.
Left alone with the silent models, Liz looked around her. She examined the

replica of General Scobie. It did look uncannily lifelike. But surely the Doctor couldn't
mean...? And what about all the others?

She looked up in relief as the Doctor came hurrying back.
'Nobody there,' he said bitterly. 'The Brigadier's gone round to see the Home

Secretary and young Munro's on his way back from Essex.
Just some idiot soldier who'd never heard of me and didn't understand what I

was talking about.'
'I'm not sure that I do,' said Liz. 'What do we do now?'
'If the Brigadier can't help us, we shall have to help ourselves.'
Liz looked at him with horror. 'You're not suggesting we just steal these things?'
'Well, not all of them,' said the Doctor reasonably. 'But we should be able to

manage one or two little ones, surely?'
'And what will the staff say when we start walking off with the exhibits?'
The Doctor gave her a pitying look. 'We don't do it right now, Liz. We'll wait

till the place is closed and empty.'



Liz drew a deep breath. 'Doctor, if you imagine for one moment...'
From outside in a corridor they heard an attendant's voice.
'Come along now please, ladies and gentlemen. The waxworks is now closed.'
The Doctor grabbed Liz by the hand. 'Come on, Liz. Hide!'
The old attendant came into the room and peered round shortsightedly. The place

was empty. He wondered briefly about the strange couple who had been so interested
in this display. Must have gone out by another exit, he thought. He turned out the
lights and went back into the main corridor.

After a moment, two of the models in the rear rankmoved and stirred. Cautiously
Liz and the Doctor came out of their stiff poses and climbed off the platform.

'Splendid,' said the Doctor. 'Now all we have to do is wait until things quieten
down a bit.'

Liz sat down on the edge of the platform. 'Doctor, when you were talking about
the watch—did you mean that's the real General Scobie?'

'Oh yes, I think so. Under some form of deep hypnosis, poor chap.'
'Can't you bring him out of it?'
The Doctor looked dubious. 'Too dangerous. I don't know the exact techniques

they used, you see. It could do him permanent damage, even kill him, if things went
wrong.'

The rows of silent figures were now shadowed in the semi-darkness. 'What about
this lot? Are they real people too?' said Liz nervously.

'Oh, I doubt it. You see, these replicas haven't been activated yet. They had to
use their Scobie replica early.' 'So as to stop the Brigadier from attacking the factory?'
'Exactly.'

'And these others?'
'They'll be activated too. When the time comes. That's why I need to get some of

them back to the lab. I've got the apparatus we fixed up for a weapon to use against
them, you see. But I'll need to run proper tests.'

'Howmuch longer have we got to wait here then? I keep getting the feeling those
things are watching me.'

The Doctor gave her an encouraging pat on the back. 'Cheer up, it won't be for
much longer. And it could be much worse, you know.'

'It could?'
The Doctor smiled. 'Just think—we might be in the Chamber of Horrors.'

Channing and Hibbert stood silently, almost reverently, beside the huge tank.
The creature inside was much bigger now. It could be seen moving and struggling
with restless life, as if ready to break out.

Channing adjusted more controls to speed up the flow of nutrient. Hibbert asked
in a kind of fascinated horror: 'What will it look like when it is ready?'

Channing straightened up from the controls and looked at him impassively. 'I
cannot tell you that.'

'But you must know,' protested Hibbert. 'You made it.'
'I made nothing. I merely created an environment which enabled the energy units

to create the perfect life form.'
Hibbert rubbed his forehead. 'Perfect for what?'
'For the conquest of this planet,' said Channing coldly.



Hibbert's face twisted with effort. 'I don't under—'
Channing looked at him with sudden contempt. 'Of course you don't understand.

How could you?'
Hibbert backed away in terror. Channing forced himself to remember that he

would need this weak human tool for just a little longer.
'Don't struggle against me, Hibbert,' he said soothingly. 'Trust me. Obey me. We

must work together.'
Hibbert relaxed. 'Yes, of course. It's all so clear when I'm with you. It's just that

sometimes...' Hibbert shook his head as if to clear it.
When he spoke again his voice was bright and cheerful. He might have been any

business executive discussing a routine problem with a colleague.
'What about the swarm leader? It still has to be recovered from UNIT.'
Channing's tone was equally matter of fact. 'That is being attended to now. By

our General Scobie.'
'But he's only a copy. If he's detected now...'
Confidently Channing said: 'Until now, Hibbert, you have seen only the basic

Autons in action. Crude weapons with a single purpose—to kill. The facsimiles are
perfect reproductions, even down to brain cells and memory traces.'

'There is still a difference. They're not human beings.'

'The only difference is the absence of emotion. And emotion is inefficient,
Hibbert. That is why the Nestenes are your superiors.'

Channing turned to go. 'I am going to activate the fascimiles. You will see then
how effective they are.'

Captain Munro paced about indecisively. He was wishing he knew what the
blazes was going on. First the Essex operation had been cancelled. All the army men
on loan to UNIT had been suddenly recalled. The Major in charge of the withdrawal
had been as puzzled as Munro himself. 'Sorry, old chap, direct orders from General
Scobie himself. All these chaps are going on special training manoeuvres in Scotland.'
Now, back' at UNIT H.Q., Munro had learned from the duty corporal that a raid on the
plastics factory had been suddenly mounted and as suddenly cancelled. The Brigadier
was off trying to secure an interview with the Home Secretary, and the Doctor and
Miss Shaw had vanished on some wild goose chase.

Apparently the Doctor had 'phoned in some time ago with a wild demand that
they should attack a waxworks. Then he'd run off in a huff without saying where
he was speaking from. There didn't seem much that Munro could usefully do about
anything.

Feeling baffled, lost and generally deserted, Munro decided that he might as well
go home. After a night and a day combing those wretched woodlands he could do
with a night in a proper bed.

Yawning, Munro was just about to go and tell the duty corporal of his intention
when he heard voices in the main area. To his astonishment he recognised the familiar
tones of General Scobie.

Hastily grabbing his cap, Munro dashed from his office. In the reception area he
found General Scobie accompanied by two tough-looking armed military policemen.
The thoroughly terrified duty corporal seemed to be protesting feebly about
something.



Saluting, Munro said: 'Can I help you, sir?' As Scobie turned round Munro
noticed that the old boy had none of his usual cheerfulness about him.

Scobie's voice was cold and formal. 'Ah, Munro. This fool here seems incapable
of obeying a simple order.'

'I'm sorry to hear that, sir. What's the problem?'

'No problem. I'm taking the meteorite off UNIT's hands.'
'But surely, sir...' Munro protested.
'Where is it?' barked Scobie.
'In the laboratory, sir. But with respect...'
Scobie wasn't listening. Followed by the two military policemen, he marched

down the corridor and into the lab. Munro had no choice but to follow.
In the laboratory the meteorite was still standing on its special stand. As Scobie

entered the green globe began once more to pulse with light. Scobie looked at it with
satisfaction and reached out to take it. Hurriedly Munro said: 'May I ask what you
intend to do with it, sir?'

'The Government are sending it to the National Geophysical Laboratory.'
'The Doctor and Miss Shaw had already begun to run a series of tests—'
'And where's this precious Doctor now, eh?'
'I'm not quite sure, sir,' Munro admitted. 'But I'm sure he'll be back soon and so

will the Brigadier. If the matter could wait till then...'
Scobie was insistent. 'Certainly not. This thing's too important to be left to some

nameless eccentric.'
Again he reached for the meteorite but Munro managed to edge between Scobie

and the stand.
'I'm sorry, sir, but I think the Brigadier ought to be informed.
I've no authority to part with the meteorite.'
Suddenly Scobie's eyes seemed to blaze with anger. 'Are you refusing to obey

an order, Captain Munro?' There was a cold ferocity in Scobie's voice as he went on:
'I am forced to remind you that, although you arc attached to UNIT, you are still a
serving officer in the British Army. Will you hand over that meteorite? Or must I take
it—and have you placed under arrest on a charge of mutiny?'

Munro was silent for a moment. His every instinct told him that something was
badly wrong. For one moment he considered resistance but the effect of years of
military training was too strong.

He said stiffly: 'You leave me no alternative, sir. But under protest.'
He stepped back from the stand.
Carefully, almost reverently, Scobie lifted the pulsing globe from its stand.

Followed by the two silent military policemen, he turned and strode from the
laboratory.

The Doctor and Liz sat waiting in the semi-darkness. Liz's head nodded forward,
and she realised that, in spite of her strange surroundings, she was almost asleep.

The Doctor rose to his feet, yawned and stretched. 'Come on, Liz. I think we've
waited long enough. The place should be empty now.'



The silence was shattered by the banging open of a door in the distance. The
sound of marching footsteps echoed along the empty corridors, coming towards their
room.

'Oh yes?' whispered Liz. 'What's all that then?'
The footsteps were now almost at the door. Hurriedly the Doctor grabbed Liz's

hand and dragged her to the back of the room, where a long velvet curtain covered a
recessed window. They both slipped behind the curtain.

Light spilled into the room from the corridor, as the door was thrown open. Liz
peered out through a tiny gap. Channing stood framed in the doorway. Beside him
was Hibbert. And behind them stood two more dim figures. Liz saw that their features
were crude and lumpy and the eyes blank. They were Autons, like the thing that had
attacked them at the cottage. She could feel the Doctor's hand gripping her arm
fiercely, warning her to keep absolutely still and silent.

Channing looked keenly round the room. It seemed as if his eyes could burn
through the curtain to reveal their hiding-place.

Channing said suddenly: 'I sense the presence of human life forms in this room.'
Liz edged away from the curtain. She could feel the Doctor tense beside her. She

heard Hibbert reply: 'There's only us here, and the facsimiles. And Scobie.'
Channing said: 'Yes, of course. Scobie.'

Then Hibbert's voice again: 'What must you do to activate them?'
'Do? Nothing. They know that it is time.'
Liz couldn't resist looking again through the tiny gap. The silent figures on the

platform began to stir. Heads turned, hands and feet moved. Jerkily, hesitantly at first,
the figures took a few stumbling paces. Then, seeming to gather confidence, they
began to step down from the low platform. In the same eerie silence they marched
one by one from the room. Soon only one figure was left.

That of Scobie. The real Scobie, Liz reminded herself. Left all alone while his
inhuman companions walked away.

The silent figures on the platform began to stir...

'Where will they go?' she heard Hibbert ask.
There was an icy triumph in Channing's reply. 'To take their places. It is time

for them to begin their work.'



Channing turned and followed the Replicas. Hibbert stood gazing for a moment
into the empty room. Suddenly Liz realised with horror that his eyes were fixed on
hers. Liz wondered if he had seen her through the gap in the curtains. Hibbert hesitated
for a moment, then followed Channing from the room. The two faceless creatures
followed behind him. The door closed.

Liz and the Doctor stepped out into the room. The Doctor said softly: 'We must
warn the Brigadier at once! Their plans must be far more advanced than I'd realised.'
Suddenly the door opened. They whirled round to face it. Hibbert was standing there.
He was alone.

Slowly, hesitantly, he came towards them. He said in a thick, slurred voice: 'What
are you doing here? You shouldn't be here.

Channing... Channing will...'
The Doctor moved forward and spoke in a low urgent voice:
'Channing will kill us if you let him know we're here. He killed your friend

Ransome.'
Hibbert's voice was confused. 'Ransome? I had to dismiss him.
He had to be dismissed because... Channing said...'
The Doctor said in an urgent whisper: 'Channing is controlling your mind. You

must resist him. Channing is your enemy. He's the enemy of the whole human race.'
Hibbert looked at him, in distress. 'Channing is my partner.
There's a new policy, you see. It's because of the new policy.'
'Now listen to me, Hibbert,' said the Doctor firmly. 'You must get away from

Channing. Get away from him and think. Come to UNIT. I can help you.'
Hibbert stared at him in anguish. He rubbed his hand over his eyes, shook his

head as if trying to clear it. Suddenly there came the sound of echoing footsteps in the
empty corridor. 'Remember,' hissed the Doctor, 'they'll kill us.'

Channing's voice called: 'Hibbert! Where are you, Hibbert?'
Liz and the Doctor had just time to duck behind their curtain before Channing

appeared in the doorway, an Auton behind him.
From the gap in the curtain Liz saw him look round the room.
'What are you doing, Hibbert? Is anything the matter?'
Liz held her breath as Hibbert stared back at Channing. She could almost see

the struggle in his mind between the effect of the Doctor's appeal and Hibbert's fear
of Channing.

Hibbert said: 'No, nothing's wrong. I was just checking.' 'There is nothing to
check. We are finished here. Come.'

Charming turned and left the room. Hibbert gave a last glance at the velvet
curtain, and obediently followed him. For a moment the Auton stood poised in the
doorway as if surveying the room. Then it, too, turned and left.

Liz heard the sound of their retreating footsteps. There was a sudden crash as a
door somewhere was slammed. Liz and the Doctor emerged cautiously from behind
the curtain.

Liz said: 'Do you think he'll tell Channing we were here?'
The Doctor rubbed his. chin. 'I hope not.'
'Why didn't he give us away?'



'Because Hibbert is still a human being,' said the Doctor. 'His mind is being
dominated by Channing. But the human mind is a wonderfully resilient thing. It's
almost impossible to control it completely for very long.'

Liz nodded in understanding. 'So his real personality keeps trying to break
through?'

'That's right. And the control seems to be weakening. It's only completely
effective when Channing's actually with him. If he can manage to get away from
Channing completely, he may be able to shake off his influence.'

The Doctor listened at the door for a moment. 'They seem to be all gone.'
Thankfully Liz followed him to the door. She couldn't get away from the place

soon enough. She stopped in the doorway and looked back. General Scobie stood in
solitary state on the now empty platform. 'What about him?'

The Doctor shot Scobie a regretful glance. 'Nothing we can do for him now. The
poor old chap is safer where he is. Come on, Liz.'

They made for the nearest exit.

10



The Final Battle
As Liz and the Doctor approached the Brigadier's office, they heard his voice

raised in outrage and astonishment. 'And you mean to say you simply stood there and
let him walk off with it?'

They entered the room to find Munro standing unhappily to attention before the
Brigadier's desk.

'There simply wasn't any alternative, sir. He is a General.
Besides, he had two armedMPswith him. It was that, or findmyself under arrest.

And they'd have taken the globe anyway. I tried to contact you as soon as it happened,
sir.'

The Brigadier waved Liz and the Doctor to chairs. 'The reason you couldn't
contact me, Munro,' he said bitterly, 'was because I have been spending many long
hours in the ante-rooms of Whitehall, trying to get in to see a number of important
Government officials.

With, I might add, a complete and utter lack of success. Either they were tied up
in endless conferences, or they'd left early for a longweekend.' He turned to theDoctor
and Liz. 'And I now get back here, only to learn that, not content with cancelling the
operation, Scobie's turned up behind my back and walked off with the only piece of
evidence.'

'Oh that wasn't Scobie, Brigadier,' said Liz. 'Scobie's still at the waxworks. That
must have been his replica.'

'Exactly,' said the Doctor. 'They activated that one first because they needed it
to deal with UNIT. Now that the rest of them are on the loose, we're going to have
real problems.'

The Brigadier gazed at them blankly. 'Others? What others?
Will you kindly explain what you're talking about, Doctor?'
Briefly, the Doctor and Liz told of their discoveries at the waxworks. At the end

of the story, the Brigadier scarcely looked any the wiser. 'Are you trying to tell me
that some blessed waxwork walked in here and commandeered that globe?'

Munro said: 'His manner was very strange, sir. Sort of cold and inhuman. Not
really like himself at all. But I'd never have thought...'

'Don't you see?' said the Doctor, 'that's the cunning of it. The Replicas aren't
exactly the same as human beings. Nothing is. A wife, or a child, or a close friend
could detect them in a moment. But we're not talking about personal relationships.
We're talking about people in authority. Seniors giving orders to juniors.'

Liz joined in. 'After all, Brigadier, if you came in here all fierce and unfriendly,
and started barking orders at everybody, I don't suppose anybody would notice the
slightest...' Her voice tailed away as she realised what she was saying. Munro
concealed a grin behind a sudden attack of coughing.

'All the same, she's quite right,' said the Doctor. 'A lot of the Replicas will
probably cause some suspicion. But they'll all be able to achieve a great deal of
damage before they're detected.'

'What harm?' said the Brigadier. 'What are these things for?'
Patiently the Doctor explained. 'Very soon they'll have taken over all the

important positions in the country.'



'What about the originals, the real people?' asked the Brigadier.
'Some of them will have been got out of the way—like poor Scobie. The others,

well...' The Doctor shrugged. 'A number of very important people will start appearing
in two places at once, giving contradictory orders. It'll all add to the confusion when
the invasion starts.'

'Invasion!'
'Don't tell me you hadn't realised, Brigadier. Everything that's happened so far

has been just a preliminary. Before long the full-scale attack will begin.'
'What are we going to do about it?' said the Brigadier. 'I've tried to alert the

Government, but no one will listen.'
TheDoctor stood up. 'Two things, Brigadier,' he said decisively. 'FirstMiss Shaw

and I must devise a weapon to use against the Autons. Once that is done, you must
attack the plastics factory.'

'How can I? I keep telling you, Scobie's withdrawn all his men.'

The Doctor frowned. 'You must have some men available?'
'Myself, Munro, one or two headquarters staff...'
'Don't forget, there's Miss Shaw—and me!' The Doctor smiled encouragingly.

'Not much of an army, is it, Brigadier? But it'll have to do.'

The thing in the huge plastic coffin was almost complete now.
It surged and pulsed, making the whole room vibrate. Channing stood watching

it, with an air of quiet satisfaction. After a moment the door to the security area opened
and Scobie, or rather Scobie's Replica, joined him. In its hands the Replica carried the
pulsing green globe. Channing turned. 'They suspected nothing?'

The Replica answered in the same flat emotionless voice.
'Nothing. The human soldiers accept my orders without question.'
'And what of UNIT?'
'UNIT is being watched. If they move against us, we shall know. And without

their soldiers they are powerless. They will not dare to attack.'
'Humans are not totally predictable,' said Channing. 'It is growing harder to

maintain my control over the man Hibbert. Now he has disappeared.'
'Hibbert is no longer necessary.'
'No.' There was satisfaction in Channing's voice. 'We need no one now.'
He took the energy unit from the hands of Scobie's Replica, and placed it

carefully in a kind of incubator next to the great plastic coffin. The pulsing of the
glowing green globe rose to a peak, as Channing pulled a series of controls. Then
with a final flash of light the energy unit became inert. The fragment of the Nestene
consciousness which it carried had been absorbed. The final element had been added.
The Nestene Mind, that vast cosmic will and intelligence that linked Charming, the
Replicas, the killer Autons and the handsome display mannequins in windows all over
the country, was now complete.

Channing turned to the Replica, his eyes blazing with exultation.

'Tomorrow we will activate the Autons. This planet will soon be ours!'

A vast tangle of electronic equipment lay on the laboratory bench. Liz Shaw was
helping the Doctor to connect and cross-connect a maze of circuitry.



'Let me see,' muttered the Doctor, grappling with a confusion of multi-coloured
leads. 'A red and a yellow makes..

'Green?' suggested Liz hopefully. 'Honestly, Doctor, I'd be a lot more help if I
knew what this contraption of yours was supposed to do.'

The Doctor looked up. 'Oh, didn't I explain that? Well, you remember the device
we were testing the green globe with—when we still had a globe to test?'

Liz nodded.
'Well, this is exactly the same sort of thing. With one or two refinements.'
'As I remember, Doctor,' said Liz, ' that thing fused.'
'Indeed it did,' admitted the Doctor. 'But this one is a good deal more powerful.

This time I'm hoping that exactly the reverse will happen. The Auton will fuse!'
Liz watched him as he went on working tirelessly. The long nimble fingers deftly

sorted out wires and the cross-connections, working quickly and surely.
Liz yawned. 'Couldn't we take a break, Doctor? I can hardly keep my eyes open.'
The Doctor shook his head. 'Must get finished, my dear.' He looked up at Liz

and she saw the lines of tension in his face, the controlled worry in his eyes. 'I don't
think there's very much more time, you see,' he said gently. 'We may need this device
very soon.'

The Doctor went on working and Liz yawned again. She looked out of the lab
window. There were a few pale streaks of light in the sky.

She looked at her watch. It would soon be morning.
'Just think,' she said, 'most of the rest of London is just starting the day!'

The city was coming to life. Office cleaners were leaving the towering blocks
in chattering bands. Commissionaires and porters were reporting for duty. Shop
managers and staff were letting themselves into their shops, getting ready to open the
doors and face the public. The earliest of the office workers, and the keenest shoppers,
were getting off their buses and emerging from Underground stations. Soon a normal,
bustling London day would be in full swing. But this day, in London, and in cities all
over the country, was to be like no other. This was the morning of the Auton invasion.

In the shop windows and in the department stores the mannequins stood waiting.
A policeman patrolling along Oxford Street cast a casual eye at the window display
in one of the big stores. A group of window dummies, dressed in bright, casual sports
clothes, sat under a beach umbrella in a cheerful seaside setting. The policeman
thought longingly of his own holidays. Only another two weeks...

As he passed on his way the mannequins posing round the table stirred and came
to life. Jerkily at first, they rose from their beach chairs and rugs. The tallest raised its
hand in a pointing gesture. The hand dropped away on its hinge to reveal a gun nozzle.

The rest of the dummies in the group followed suit. For all their handsome faces
and bright holiday clothes, these, too, were killer Autons. Swiftly, unhesitatingly, their
leader stepped straight through the store window and out on to the pavement.

The astonished policeman heard the crash of glass and spun round. His first
thought was that there must have been some sort of accident. He stopped in utter
amazement at the sight of the tall figure of the Auton stalking towards him along the
pavement. Other figures followed the first Auton through the gap, stepping on to the
pavement. From up and down the street came the crash of glass as other Autons came
to life. The policeman's next thought was of some kind of enormous hoax. Students,



he thought vaguely. They'd gone too far this time. That thought was also his last. As
he ran towards the group of Autons, their leader raised its wrist-gun and blasted him
to the ground.

Their leader raised its wrist-gun and blasted him to the ground.

By now other groups of Autons were appearing on the pavement. Ruthlessly they
blasted down everyone they met. People ran screaming, trying to escape. In streets
nearby, in streets all over London, and in the streets of every major city in Britain, it
was the same story. People screamed and panicked and ran, and the Autons blasted
them down.

The police received thousands upon thousands of calls. But there was little they
could do. Arms were issued, but the few rifles and revolvers available were powerless
against the Autons. BBC and ITV issued urgent warnings. 'Don't go to work. Don't
go out shopping. Stay indoors and barricade yourselves in your homes.

Admit no one you do not know.'
Many people were saved by warnings like these, but many others, already out

on the streets, were unable to escape. The Autons seemed to be everywhere.
The Government declared martial law and called out the Army. But most of

the available troops were mysteriously absent on manoeuvres far away from the big
towns. They were recalled at once, but things seemed to go wrong continually. Orders
failed to arrive, or were misinterpreted. Troops were told to stay put, or sent to the
wrong place. In the other services the story was the same. The Navy and the Air Force
armed what men they could, but the men never seemed to get clear orders, or to arrive
where they were wanted. It was as though in every position of authority traitors were
working against the Government, deliberately confusing the situation.

In an office in Whitehall a young civil servant listened appalled as he heard his
Minister on the telephone, deliberately giving orders that would worsen the situation.
He rushed into the office to demand an explanation. The Minister stretched out his
hand in a curious pointing gesture—and the hand dropped away to reveal a gun.



There weremany other similar scenes.Manymore of the Replicas were detected,
but not before they had done enormous damage, spreading chaos and confusion
everywhere.

Commando squads of killer Autons in their dark overalls began to attack
communications centres. Telephone exchanges, radio and TV transmitters,
underground power cables, all exploded in flame under repeated blasts from theAuton
weapons. Radios, TV

screens and telephones went silent.
Completely cut off from each other, little groups of soldiers, policemen,

Government officials, desperately tried to make sense of the situation, tried to find
some way of combating the enemy. And all the while they eyed one another uneasily.
No one knew when a familiar hand would drop away to reveal the wrist-gun of an
Auton.

There were, of course, one or two successes. A group of quarrymen broke open
their explosives hut and blew several Autons to pieces with blasting charges. Here and
there tanks prowled the streets, shooting down or crushing the Autons in their path.
Little groups of soldiers became tired of waiting for orders and for reinforcements that
never came. Acting on their own initiative they raided their own armouries for what
weapons they could find and fought desperate little street battles, turning bazookas,
trench-mortars and anti-tank guns against the enemy.

UNIT H.Q., was under siege. The sleepy duty soldier who had opened the main
doors that morning had been greeted by an energy-blast from a waiting Auton that
missed him by inches. He had promptly slammed the doors shut again, and pressed
the button that activated a second pair of reinforcing doors in heavy armour-plate.

All over UNIT H.Q., emergency doors and shutters slammed down.
In his office the Brigadier had sent out desperate calls for help.
Everywhere it was the same story. Chaos... panic... confusion...
Then, one by one, the outside 'phones went dead.
The Brigadier had told the Doctor of the situation as far as he knew it. The Doctor

nodded gravely. 'Much as I feared,' he said. 'I'd hoped for a little more time.. And
even as he listened, he had gone on working on the complicated electronic device.
Now, waiting in his office, the Brigadier wondered if the thing would ever be ready.
Not that it mattered, he thought gloomily. There was little they could do now. Maybe
take a few of the enemy with them before the inevitable end. The internal 'phone, still
powered by the emergency generator, suddenly buzzed. The Brigadier snatched it up.
'We're ready now,'

said the Doctor's voice. The Brigadier slammed down the 'phone and ran to the
laboratory.

He found Liz and the Doctor contemplating the completed device. Two army
knapsacks rested on the bench. The first contained a jumble of electronic equipment,
the second a portable power-pack.

A long flex connected the first knapsack to the second. The Doctor was busily
plugging what looked like a microphone, also on a long flex, into the pack containing
the equipment.

The Brigadier looked at the contraption dubiously. 'Is that it?'



'Of course that's it,' said the Doctor. 'This first knapsack carries the device itself.
The second, which will be carried byMiss Shaw, holds the power source.' He beamed
proudly at his brain-child.

'And what's this?' said the Brigadier, indicating the microphone-like object. 'I
thought we wanted to destroy them, not interview them.'

'This,' said the Doctor, 'is the,... er, business end. A UHF
transmitter. The device is effective only at very short range, I'm afraid.'
'He means you practically have to shove it down their throats,'
explained Liz.
The Brigadier looked unimpressed. 'Will it work?'
'We shan't know that till we try. Are you ready for the attack?'
'As ready as we'll ever be. I never thought I'd lead a force consisting of

headquarters clerical staff, a female scientist and...' At a loss for words he waved his
hand towards the Doctor.

'Cheer up, Brigadier,' said the Doctor. 'It's quality that counts, you know, not
quantity. Shall we go?' He passed Liz the power-pack and shouldered the other
himself.

A fewmoments later the Brigadier and his little force, loaded into two jeeps, were
waiting in the UNIT garage. The Doctor was at the wheel of one jeep, accompanied
by Liz and two soldiers. The Brigadier and the remaining soldiers were crammed into
the other.

The soldiers were heavily armed with a variety of curious weapons.
The engines were already revving up. The Brigadier gave a signal and a soldier

pressed the button to open the steel garage doors, and jumped in the back of the jeep.
As soon as the doors began to open the Doctor gunned his jeep into a racing start and
shot up the ramp.

The Brigadier's jeep followed close behind. Energy bolts from waiting Autons
whizzed round their heads, but the little jeeps weaved in and out of the attackers and
disappeared out of sight.

Afterwards Liz could only remember that journey out of London as a kind of
nightmare. By now the streets were empty, so there was no traffic to delay them. There
was wreckage and devastation all around. Many buildings were now ablaze but there
was no sound of fire engines speeding to the rescue. Fire stations had been one of the
Auton's first targets, and by now most fire engines were destroyed.

They passed little groups of fleeing, terrified people. One or two of them shouted
out warnings. The route they took went through side streets and back alleys, away
from the shopping centres, away from the Autons. Occasionally Autons did appear
and fired after them, often missing by inches. Once an Auton stepped directly in front
of their jeep, wrist-gun raised. The Doctor put his foot down and smashed straight
into it, sending it flying against the side of a building. Liz looked over her shoulder
and saw to her horror that the Auton had lurched to its feet and was firing after them.

Soon, to her heartfelt relief, they were leaving the suburbs behind them, speeding
down country lanes to the plastics factory where everything had begun, and where
everything must be ended if there was to be any hope for mankind.

In the woods just outside the factory a solitary figure had been curled hidden
in a ditch for hours. Unaware of all that had been happening in the cities, George



Hibbert had been taking the advice given by the Doctor in the waxworks—to get away
from Channing so that he could think. Gradually, in the peace and quiet of the forest,
Hibbert's brain had cleared at last. The full horror of what he had become flooded
over him. But at last he was himself again. At last he could think his own thoughts.
And he knew what he must do. Stiffly he rose to his feet and began to walk back
towards the factory.

Inside the factory itself Channing stood in silent communion with the creature
in the tank. Through the shared Nestene mind he was aware of all the destruction he
had caused. Channing was pleased. Everything was going as it should. He was aware,
too, that the Doctor and the Brigadier with their tiny force were on the way to attack
him. He wondered idly what made these humans struggle so desperately to the last.

The factory was now almost empty of the killer Autons. They had been sent to
do their deadly work around the country. Only a small group remained, to guard the
creature in the tank. The creature that would soon emerge and take its rightful place
as ruler. But Channing was not disturbed by the fact that there were so few Autons.
He had made his arrangements. The factory was still well guarded.

A voice behind him said: 'Channing.' He turned. Hibbert was walking towards
him, an iron crowbar in his hand. He said: 'Hibbert.

There you are. I have been worried about you., A wave of hatred flooded over
Hibbert at the sound of that familiar voice. He heard Channing say: 'You should not
have gone away, Hibbert. It is safer for you to stay with me.'

Hibbert's voice was harsh. 'So that you can go on controlling my mind. Oh no,
Channing. The Doctor was right. I can think, away from you.'

'You have spoken again to the Doctor?'
'He was at the waxworks. He knows what you're up to. He'll stop you.'
Channing was amused. 'He may know, Hibbert. But there is nothing he can do.

Our invasion of your planet has already begun.'
Hibbert looked at him in loathing. 'Who are you? What are you?'
Channing said: 'We are the Nestenes. We have been colonising other planets for

a thousand million years. Now we have come to take Earth.'
'But what's going to happen to us—toMan?' The full horror of it suddenly came

over Hibbert. 'You'll destroy us.'
Channing's voice was soothing. 'Not you, Hibbert. You are our ally. You have

helped us.'
Hibbert said dully: 'And you... you're not human.'
'I am part of the whole, Hibbert. Nestenes have no individual existence. This

body is merely a container, Hibbert. You should know that. You made me.'
And Channing smiled a terrible smile.
All the things which had been blocked from Hibbert's mind now came back to

him. He remembered finding the green pulsating globe in the woods, the night of
the first meteor shower. He remembered taking the globe back to the factory. He
remembered staring as if hypnotised into its flashing green depths.

It had seemed as if the globe was talking, deep within his mind. It had told him
of the other globes, and where to find them. It had told him how to design the new
machinery, to order the parts, to assemble them himself. It had told him of the special
plastics mix that had to be fed into the tanks, and how to attach the electrodes to the
globe to transfer its energy.



Night after night Hibbert had worked, secretly in the deserted factory. Luckily,
Ransome was on that trip to America. Then finally Hibbert had stood beside a
bubbling tank of plastics mix, and connected the electrodes and thrown the switch.
The globes had flashed and then died. The tank of bubbling plastic seethed with life.

A shape within it began to solidify, and dripping from its depths rose something
in the shape of a man. The something that was now called Channing.

After that things became hazy in Hibbert's mind. He and Channing had made the
Autons, and the Autons had made other Autons. All the time Channing's grip on his
mind had grown stronger and stronger. Finally, he had had no thoughts of his own
at all. He had become merely an extension of Channing's will. But all that was over
now. He had broken free.

Suddenly Hibbert gestured to the giant plastic coffin with his crowbar. 'And that
thing in there?'

'That is our real form, Hibbert. The form we once had on our own planet, before
we shook off the body and became pure mind.

We created human forms for ourselves to help begin our invasion.
But once the planet is ours, we shall re-create the form that was once our own.'

Chaning laughed, looking proudly at the tank. 'In there is the repository of all the
Nestene consciousness. Would you like to see it, Hibbert?' Again Channing laughed,
and the thing within the plastic tank bubbled and seethed as though sharing in his
mirth.

Hibbert snatched at one central thought. 'Then if you exist as one, you can die
as one!'

He leaped towards the tank, crowbar raised. But before he could reach it anAuton
stepped from the shadows and blasted him from existence. At a sign from Channing
the Auton blasted at Hibbert's body with its energy-gun until, like Ransome before
him, he had totally disappeared.

Channing suddenly stiffened. Through the eyes of an Auton posted in the woods
near the factory, he saw the UNIT jeeps flashing by. Channing wondered again at
this stupid insistence of the humans on fighting to the very last minute. He left the
Restricted Area to prepare to meet them.

Jolting across the woodlands between the trees, the Brigadier's little force had
driven the jeeps to the very edge of the wire fence surrounding the factory. Swiftly
and efficiently two soldiers cut a gap in the fencing. The Brigadier went through first,
followed by the Doctor and Liz, carrying the two linked packs. The handful of soldiers
followed after them. They moved swiftly and silently to the factory buildings, and up
to a small back door. It was locked. At a nod from the Brigadier one of his men blew
it open. The little group moved through the shattered door and into the factory itself.

They looked round in amazement. The place was totally deserted now, and the
strange alien machines were silent, their work for the moment over.

'Where's everybody gone?' said Liz uneasily.
'They're here—somewhere,' said the Doctor. 'That's the place we want.' He

pointed towards the Restricted Area. But before they could take another step, armed
men appeared from hiding and sprang up all round them. Liz was delighted to see
they wore the uniform of the Regular Army.

'You've got some reinforcements after all, Brigadier,' she said.



The Doctor glanced around. 'I don't think so, Liz,' he said gently. 'Those guns
are pointed at us.'

To her utter amazement Liz saw that he was right. The young Captain in charge
of the soldiers had drawn his revolver and was covering the Brigadier.

'Brigadier, you and your men are under arrest. Please lay down your arms
immediately.'

From the door of the Restricted Area, Channing watched. It had amused him to
have his factory guarded with human soldiers.

The Brigadier could scarcely believe his ears. 'What the blazes do you think
you're up to, man?' he snapped. 'Don't you realise that we're being invaded, and this
place is the centre of it all? Put down that gun and give me some help.'

Confidently the Brigadier strode towards the young officer.
The Captain raised his revolver. 'I'm sorry, sir, but I have my orders.

I'll shoot if you force me to. Now order your men to lay down their arms, or my
men will fire.'

'Then they'll have to shoot, Captain.' The Brigadier's voice was calm. 'We came
here to do a job and we're going to do it. Now are you really going to open fire on a
fellow officer? Or are you going to be sensible and place yourself under my
command?'

Liz glanced at the Doctor. She nodded towards the weapon they carried, but the
Doctor shook his head. It might or might not work against the Autons, but against
human soldiers it was useless.

Liz looked at the young Captain, wondering what he would do.
It was obvious that he had not expected things to go this far.
The Brigadier said: 'Well? Make your mind up. Because I assure you I'm going

in there.' He nodded towards the Restricted Area. Concealed behind the doorway,
Channing watched impatiently. By now the Brigadier should have surrendered, since
he was so hopelessly outnumbered. Again this tiresome human insistence on
continued resistance. Were they too stupid to give up?

Channing wondered.
There was an edge of panic in the Captain's voice. He stubbornly repeated: 'I

have my orders.' The Brigadier took another step forward.
Suddenly the Doctor's voice broke the tense silence. 'I'm no expert in military

matters, but surely the Brigadier outranks you.
Shouldn't you obey his orders now?' For a moment it looked as if the Captain

would give way. He lowered his revolver. Then someone stepped from the shadows.
It was, or rather it seemed to be, General Scobie. Liz felt the Doctor tense with
excitement beside her. He gave her a warning tap on the elbow and began to edge
towards the General. Liz followed with the power-pack.

The Captain turned thankfully to the figure of General Scobie, relieved to be free
of his terrible responsibility.

'For the last time, Brigadier, will you surrender, or shall I order my men to shoot
you down?' The General's voice was harsh and threatening. Not a bit like the real
Scobie, thought Liz. But real enough to convince those soldiers.

By now Liz and the Doctor had edged their way round the group and were
standing close to Scobie.



The Brigadier said: 'Now, listen to me, Captain, this is not the real General
Scobie.'

'I'm sorry, sir, but it certainly is,' said the Captain. 'I've served on the General's
staff. I know him well.'

'Perhaps I can settle the argument,' said the Doctor. 'Would you care to say a
few words into this?' He held the microphone-like object close to Scobie's face and
snapped: 'Switch on, Liz!'

Liz reached inside the power-pack and turned on the controls.
Scobie said: 'What is this nonsense...?' He clasped his hands to his face and fell

writhing to the ground. His body became still.
The Captain turned on the Doctor. 'You've killed him!'
'Oh, I don't think so,' said the Doctor. 'You see, he was never really alive.' He

knelt by Scobie's body and turned it over. The face had become blank, lumpy,
featureless. Like that of an Auton.

(Far away in London the real General Scobie suddenly awoke, and was
astonished to find himself alone in the Replica Room of the waxworks.)

The Captain gazed at Scobie's face in horrified unbelief. 'Well,'
snapped the Brigadier, ' now will you place your men under my orders?'
The last vestige of doubt disappeared from the Captain's mind.
'Yes, sir,' he said.
Then from inside the Restricted Area marched a line of Autons.
'Take cover!' yelled the Brigadier. UNIT men and Regulars found what cover

they could behind the factory machinery. The Auton hands dropped down on their
hinges, and energy-bolts blazed from their guns. The Brigadier and his soldiers did
their best to hold the advancing Autons. The bullets from the Regulars' rifles had
little or no effect. But the Brigadier had equipped his men with sub-machine-guns and
grenades, and the UNIT armoury had even managed to produce one anti-tank rifle.
The heavier weapons did have some effect. As the soldiers returned the Autons' fire,
the din in the little factory was deafening. Liz watched horrified as several soldiers,
struck by sizzling energy-bolts, were hurled clear across the room to collapse like
empty sacks against the walls. From the corner where she and the Doctor were hiding,
she saw Autons cut to pieces by machine-gun bullets, and blown to pieces by
grenades. An Auton arm blown clear from the body continued to lash wildly round
the room, spitting energy-bolts like a demented snake.

Liz became aware that the Autons were gaining. Their line was moving ever
closer to the spot where she and the Doctor were hiding.

She tugged at the Doctor's sleeve. Surely they ought to fall back too?
The Doctor shook his head. He gestured to Liz to be ready with the power-pack.

Then, quite deliberately, the Doctor rose to his feet. He stepped full in the path of an
advancing Auton and thrust the transmitter near its face. Without waiting to be told,
Liz switched on the power-pack. The Auton suddenly slumped, collapsing almost on
top of them.

Huddled behind the shelter of the Auton's body, Liz and the Doctor waited, as
the line of other Autons swept over and past them.

Liz's nose was no more than an inch from the Auton's outstretched arm. She
looked at the big hand—it was the left one, the one without the gun—and shuddered
at the blunt fingers with no fingernails.

Then the Doctor tugged her to her feet.



'We've done it, Liz,' he whispered exultantly, 'we're behind the enemy lines.'
With the battle raging behind them, Liz and the Doctor ran for the now unguarded
door to the Restricted Area.

Once they were inside, both stopped in amazement. The room seemed to be
empty. It was dominated by the vast coffin-shaped tank. Inside the tank something
enormous heaved, and seethed and bubbled.

Liz looked up at the Doctor. 'There's something alive in there,'
she said. 'Oh yes,' said the Doctor mildly. 'I rather thought there would be, you

know. It was the logical next step. You remember, poor Ransome told us about it.'
The Doctor sounded pleased to have his theories confirmed. To her amazement Liz
saw that his face showed not fear, but a sort of detached scientific curiosity.

'Now, I wonder...' said the Doctor, and he walked round the tank as if
contemplating a swim in it.

'Doctor, you're not going in there,' said Liz, as the Doctor dragged over a crate
to stand on.

'Someone's got to, you know. Our friend in there is the key to everything.'
'Quite right, Doctor. But your discovery has come too late.'
Channing stepped from behind the tank, and stood facing them.
'Oh, I don't know,' said the Doctor. 'There's a saying on this planet that it's never

too late.'
Channing looked at the Doctor. 'You speak as if you are not one of the humans.'
'As a matter of fact, I'm not.'
'I thought as much when you first came here. Your mind has a different feel to

these humans. There are depths in it I cannot reach.'
The Doctor said: 'Like you, I am not of this planet. But I didn't come here of my

own choice. Why did you come?'
'We are Nestenes. Our purpose is conquest—always. We must spread the

Nestene mind, the Nestene consciousness throughout all the galaxies.'
'We?' asked the Doctor keenly. 'You speak for all your people?'
'I am all my people,' said Channing simply. 'We are the Nestenes.We are all one.'
'A collective brain, a collective nervous system, is that it?
And as far as Earth is concerned, all housed in that life form in the tank?'
'Exactly so!' said Channing. His voice rose to an exultant shout. 'Would you like

to look upon the true form of the Nestenes, Doctor—before you die?'
The fluid in the tank heaved and bubbled in a final convulsion.
The whole side of the tank shattered open, as the Doctor and Liz leaped back.
Standing towering over them was the most nightmarish creature Liz had ever

seen. A huge, many-tentacled monster something between spider, crab and octopus.
The nutrient fluids from the tank were still streaming down its sides. At the front of
its glistening body a single huge eye glared at them, blazing with alien intelligence
and hatred.



Standing towering over them was the most nightmarish creature Liz had ever
seen.

The Doctor stood peering up at it with an expression of fascinated interest.
'Remarkable,' he said. 'Quite remarkable.' Then he shouted: 'Now, Liz!'

But just as he spoke theNestenemonster lashed out with one of its many tentacles
and began to drag the Doctor towards it. Liz switched on the power-pack. Nothing
happened.

'Now, Liz! Now!' the Doctor shouted urgently. Again Liz flicked the controls,
arid again there was no result. Liz realised that when the monster grabbed the Doctor,
the lead connecting the Doctor's machine to her pack had been pulled out.

The monster was dragging the Doctor closer and closer. He struggled frantically
as a second slimy tentacle wrapped itself round his throat, beginning to throttle him.
Liz ducked under the creature, scrabbling for the other end of the lead. She grabbed
it and began to plug it in. Angrily, yet another tentacle wrapped round her, but with
a final desperate effort Liz managed to jam the lead into its socket.

Immediately, therewas a humof power from theDoctor's machine. As Liz turned
the power up to its highest notch the Doctor shoved the microphone-shaped
transmitter up to the single blazing eye. Immediately, the monster gave a single
agonised howl that seemed to shatter Liz's eardrums. The tentacles holding Liz and
the Doctor lost their power and they fell to the ground.



Then, as they watched, the hideous creation that had housed the Nestene mind
began to blur and dissolve. It seemed to melt away before them like a wax model in
a blast of fierce heat.

Finally there was nothing left but a sort of vast spreading puddle of thick, slimy
liquid. For a moment that single eye remained floating in the puddle, glaring its hatred
at them to the last. Then it, too, dissolved. The Nestene was dead.

Liz and the Doctor picked themselves up. The Doctor saw Channing, face
downwards where he had fallen. He turned the body over. Like Scobie's Replica
before him, Channing now had the crude blank features of an Auton. The Doctor
looked up. 'Nothing to be frightened of, my dear,' he said gently. 'It's only a waxwork.'

Aminute or two before, as Liz was struggling to re-connect the Doctor's machine
to the power-pack, Brigadier Alastair Lethbridge-Stewart had resigned himself to the
end of a not-inglorious military career. He and his men had fought a gallant rearguard
action across the factory, many being blasted to extinction by Nestene energy-bolts
in the process. The few left alive were now trapped in an angle of the factory wall,
under a deadly crossfire from two groups of advancing Autons. The Brigadier cut
an advancing Anton in two with a savage burst from his sub-machine-gun. The gun
emptied itself, and the Brigadier automatically reached for another magazine from his
belt. But the belt was empty. Another Auton appeared in front of the Brigadier, its
wrist-gun aimed at point-blank range. The Brigadier gazed into the nozzle of the gun,
waiting for the final blast. Then, to his amazement, the outstretched arm seemed to
wilt before his eyes. It drooped, and the Auton crashed to the floor.

All around, the other Autons were collapsing too.
Suddenly there was silence. Powder smoke drifted in low clouds through the still

air of the factory. The Brigadier and his few remaining men looked at each other in
astonishment, scarcely able to believe that they were still alive. A voice cut through
the silence.

'Brigadier! Where are you, Brigadier!' came the Doctor's voice impatiently. 'Are
you all right?' The Brigadier ran for the Restricted Area.

Liz and the Doctor waited in the doorway. Behind them the Brigadier could see
some kind of nasty oozy mess spreading over the floor. Tired but happy, the Doctor
surveyed the scene. Behind him was the shattered tank, the dissolved monster and the
remains of Channing.

In front of him the bullet-shattered factory, the collapsed Autons, and the soldiers
who had died holding them back.

'Glad to see you're all right, Doctor, Miss Shaw,' said the Brigadier.
'I'm not sure if I am yet,' said Liz shakily.
The Doctor put a comforting arm round her shoulders. 'I think we've won, Liz,'

he said gently. 'But the price has been very high.'

It wasn't until they were safely back at UNITH.Q., that they realised it was really
all over.When theNestenemonster had died at the plastics factory, Autons all over the
country had become instantly lifeless, as harmless as the waxworks they resembled.
Much damage had been done, and many lives lost. But gradually the country was
pulling itself together again, and soon a return to normal life would begin.



In the UNIT laboratory the returned warriors were celebrating in mugs of strong,
sweet army tea. Proudly the Doctor was explaining the workings of his machine.

'Basically, it's a sort of ECT machine—electro-convulsive therapy. Only much
more powerful. You see, the Nestenes were held together and animated by that one
central brain. In a sense they were all literally part of one vast creature. A creature
that could split itself up, put fractions of its consciousness into different forms. It put
just a tiny bit of itself into the Autons. Just enough so that they could move and think,
in the simplest possible way. They weren't really alive at all.'

Liz shivered. 'They were alive enough for me!'
The Doctor took a swig of his tea and went on. 'It put a bit more of itself into the

Replicas. They could pick up and reproduce the pattern of a human brain, and give
quite a good imitation of a human being.'

'What about this fellow Channing?' asked the Brigadier.
The Doctor rubbed his chin. 'I think it put a tremendous amount of itself into

Channing. He was the advance guard. He could think, and plan. I think he could even
feel, in a way, though his emotions weren't really like ours.'

'And that creature in the factory?' Liz asked.
'Well, since the Nestenes are really just one creature,' the Doctor explained, 'I

suppose it was more comfortable for them to have the part of them that was here all in
one body. When Channing really got organised at the factory he set about creating a
suitable receptacle. And as soon as it was ready they transferred all of themselves, or
rather all of itself, all its vital energy, from the meteorite state into that one collective
brain.'

'Putting all their eggs into one basket?' said the Brigadier.
'Just so,' said the Doctor. 'And by giving the creature a kind of brain-storm, you

might say I kicked over the basket.'
'You said "the part of them that was here", Doctor,' said Liz. 'You mean there's

more of it?'
'Oh, I should think so,' said the Doctor cheerfully. 'I don't suppose the Nestene

brain risked all of itself on this planet.'

The Brigadier said: 'Then they might try again?'
The Doctor looked thoughtful. 'It's possible. But they've had a pretty severe

setback. And since they seem to communicate by telepathy the rest of the Nestene
brain will know how badly they were defeated here.'

Liz said practically: 'Do they know how limited the range of UHF waves are?
You practically have to stand on their toes for that thing to work.'

The Doctor nodded. 'That is something I hope they haven't learned.'
The Brigadier said: 'Doctor, if the Nestenes do decide to launch a second attack,

can we rely on your help again?'
The Doctor gave him a quizzical look. 'Do I take it that you're satisfied that I'm

not an impostor?'
'Oh, I think so,' said the Brigadier. 'Two things combined to convince me,

actually.'
'Oh, yes?' said the Doctor curiously.
'The brilliance of your scientific results was one,' said the Brigadier.
'And the other?' said the Doctor, with a modest smile.



'Your uniquely, aggravating temperament,' the Brigadier said crisply. 'There
couldn't be two like you anywhere, Doctor. Your face may have changed, but not
your character!'

For a moment the Doctor looked offended, then he caught Liz's eye and grinned.
The Brigadier went on: 'I am prepared to offer you the post of UNIT's Scientific

Adviser—since Miss Shaw here doesn't seem to want it. What do you say?'
The Doctor looked thoughtful. 'I really think we ought to discuss terms first, old

chap.'
'Terms?' said the Brigadier. Liz could tell from his voice that he thought the

honour of working for UNIT should be reward enough.
'Terms?' the Brigadier said again. 'Well, I think you'll find the salary adequate.'

'My dear chap, I don't want money,' said the Doctor indignantly. 'Got no use for
the stuff.'

The Brigadier looked puzzled. 'Then what do you want?'
'Facilities to repair the TARDIS! Equipment, a laboratory, somewhere to sleep.

Oh, and I insist that Miss Shaw stays on here to help me.'
He looked appealingly at Liz. So did the Brigadier.
'Well, Miss Shaw?' he said.
Liz took a deep breath and then nodded. 'I must be raving mad,' she said. 'But

all right. If you really want me to.'
The Brigadier said: 'There you are, then, Doctor. Anything else?'
'Good heavens, yes! Do you realise I'm stranded here with nothing more than I

stand up in?' The Doctor looked guilty. 'Come to think of it, most of that isn't really
mine. Oh dear, and there's that car, too.' He looked appealingly at the Brigadier. 'You
know, I really took to that car. It's got character.'

'No, Doctor,' said the Brigadier firmly. 'The car must go back to its owner.'
The Doctor sighed. 'Yes, yes, I suppose it must. But there's no reason why you

shouldn't find me another one like it, is there?'
The Brigadier looked as if he was about to explode when the Doctor said gently:

'It would help to persuade me to stay, you know.'
'Oh, very well,' growled the Brigadier.
Liz couldn't help smiling at the Doctor's air of childlike pleasure.
'Oh good,' he said happily. 'When can I go out and choose it?'
'Not just yet,' said the Brigadier patiently. 'At the moment you have no official

existence, Doctor. I must fix you up with a full set of papers first.' He turned to go, and
then stopped. 'By the way, Doctor, I've just realised. I don't even know your name.'

TheDoctor looked from the Brigadier to Liz Shaw.All in all hewas quite looking
forward to his stay on Earth. Naturally, he wouldn't be there for long. In spite of
the Time Lords he'd soon manage to get the TARDIS working and be off on his
travels. For instance, he could try reversing the polarity of the neutron flow in the
dematerialisation circuit...

He was brought out of his daydream by the Brigadier's voice.
'Well, Doctor?'
Ah yes, a name... he thought. Just for the time he was here. No question of telling

them his real name, of course. Time Lord names have an almost mystic importance,
and are usually kept closely-guarded secrets. Anyway, they'd never be able to
pronounce it. A name... thought the Doctor. Something simple, dignified and modest.



He didn't want to draw attention to himself. The Doctor's eyes brightened. He'd
got it—the very thing! He turned to the waiting Brigadier.

'Smith,' said the Doctor decisively. 'Doctor John Smith!'