DOCTORWHO
MARCO POLO

JOHN LUCAROTTI

Based on the BBC television serial by John Lucarotti by arrangement
with the British Broadcasting Corporation

John Lucarotti Number 94 in the Doctor Who Library

A Target Book

Published in 1985

By the Paperback Division of

W.H. Allen & Co. PLC
44 Hill Street, London W1X 8LB



1 Roof of the World

'It's freezing cold outside,' Susan said, looking at the external temperature
thermometer in the TARDIS, 'minus twenty.'

'Fahrenheit or centigrade?' Barbara asked.
'Centigrade,' Susan replied. Ian did a rapid mental calculation.
'Thirty-six degrees of frost, fahrenheit,' he said. 'Chilly.'
'Chilly, where chilly, Grandfather?' Susan asked. The Doctor went to the

digital time-orientation printout on the central control panel and pressed the
appropriate button.

'Earth,' he said, 'in the year one thousand two hundred and eighty-nine.'
'Certainly not the Caribbean, then,' Ian muttered.
'There's no call for sarcasm, Chesterton.' The Doctor sounded vexed. 'We'll

move on.' He operated the dematerialisation control and all the lights went out.
Hastily, the Doctor took his pencil-torch from his breast pocket and shone it on
the main fuse box.

'The circuit-breaker's jumped,' he said, 'must've been a minor overload
somewhere.' He reconnected the breaker but nothing happened. 'I can't work by
torchlight,' he added testily. 'Open the door, someone.'

'What? In minus twenty!' Susan exclaimed.
'Put on your coat, child,' the Doctor replied, 'but open the door so that I can

see what I'm doing.'
'It might be the middle of the night,' Barbara observed.
'And it might equally be the middle of the day,' the Doctor retorted. Ian

opened the door and was hit by an icy gust of wind. He shut it quickly.
'Daylight,' he reported.
'Then wrap up warmly,' the Doctor advised.
'You'd think that something as sophisticated as the TARDIS would have a

stand-by emergency lighting system,' Ian grumbled.
'It doesn't need one,' the Doctor snapped. 'This situation can't happen.' Out

of respect, the others refrained from pointing out that it could and had.
Using the pencil-torch for light they put on their warmest clothes and Ian

opened the door again. The sunlight reflected off the snowwas blinding and they
had to squint against it whilst their eyes adjusted.

Ian, Susan and Barbara went outside.
'Where are we?' Susan asked.
'The Arctic, Antarctica, the Andes, Siberia, the Himalayas,' Ian replied, 'but

not the Alps.'
'Why not?' Barbara said. Ian grinned at her.
'No one's yodelling.'
'Look at those.' Susan was awestruck as she pointed to the huge prints in

the snow.
'A yeti, an abominable snowman,' Barbara ventured. Ian shielded his eyes

and looked at the horizon. There were mountains all around but the TARDIS
stood on an undulating plateau.

'I don't know where we are,' he murmured.



'On the top of the world, perhaps,' Susan said.
'Possibly,' Ian replied as the Doctor came to the door of the ship.
'Chesterton,' he called, 'may I have a word with you?' Ian went back into the

TARDIS. On the central control panel was a small black box with a hole burnt
in one side. The Doctor picked it up.

'We are in dire straights, young man,' he said. 'This is the energy distributor
for the TARDIS and it's gone to pot. No heat, no light, no power, nothing.'

'How long will it take you to repair it or make another one?'
'Three or four days,' the Doctor shrugged, 'longer than we have to live.We'll

freeze to death inside because as it becomes colder the interior will turn into a
cold storage room.'

'And outside, we'll freeze to death anyway,' Ian added. The Doctor nodded.
'Then I'd better find fuel for a fire to keep us warm.'

'Up here?' the Doctor exclaimed, 'what do you expect to find?'
'Heaven only knows,' Ian replied, 'but I must try.' As Ian went to the door

the Doctor asked him to send in Susan to help him.
When Susan had gone, Ian told Barbara the truth of the situation.
'What are we going to do?' she asked.
'Follow those imprints. You go in one direction and I'll take the other. But

not too far,' he warned. 'Remember how cold it is and you must be able to get
back. So be careful and shield your eyes as much as you can against the glare.'
Barbara nodded and they set off in different directions.

Ian spread out his gloved fingers and held his hands at right angles in front
of his eyes, peering through the gaps as he followed the tracks. Barbara cupped
her hands in front of her eyes, looking through the space between the sides of
her palms and little fingers which meant she had no lateral vision at all unless
she turned her head from side to side.

The snow was crisp and hard. Barbara thought it was probably very deep
but packed, as her boots only sank into it as far as her ankles. Suddenly, she saw
a second set of prints cutting across the ones she was following. She turned her
head and saw a furry monster standing on its hind legs staring at her. Barbara's
cupped hands dropped down to her mouth and she screamed. It frightened the
monster which lumbered off down an incline and out of sight just as Ian stumbled
breathlessly up to her. Barbara pointed out the direction it had taken.

'Amonster, all fur, except for its eyes which were narrow slits, was standing
upright and staring at me.'

'A yeti?'
'About your height.'
'Then human perhaps, wrapped up against the cold.'
'I don't know. I was just so scared.'
Ian put his arm around her. 'I'll take you back to the TARDIS.' They retraced

their steps and told the Doctor and Susan what had happened. The Doctor looked
at Barbara.

'Did you notice anything distinctive about it?' he asked.
'Its eyes. They were narrow slits,' The Doctor turned back to Ian.
'Snow blindness mask,' he said, 'which would mean it's human. And if that's

so, there must be shelter nearby.'
'I agree with you, Doctor,' Ian replied.



'Then we'll shut the shop and follow the prints.' The Doctor was brisk and
business-like, then he looked at each of them in turn. 'After all,' he added, 'we've
nothing to lose and everything to gain.' The Doctor pulled down the side flaps
of his fur hat over his ears, tied the strings under his chin, put on a heavy pair
of gloves, wrapped a scarf around his neck and locked the TARDIS when they
were outside.

They made their way to the point where the tracks crossed, by which time
the Doctor was struggling for air.

'So rarified up here,' he gasped, 'will you help me, Chesterton?' Ian took
the Doctor by the arm as they followed the second set of prints to the edge of
the slope.

'Look!' Susan exclaimed. Below them about two hundred yards away was
a magnificently coloured tent surrounded by smaller, more simple ones. There
were also six covered wagons with long-haired oxen huddled together.

Ian tapped the Doctor on his arm and mouthed the word 'look', pointing to
his own shoulder with his thumb. The Doctor looked cautiously behind them.
There were seven fur-clad warriors with scimitars in their gloved hands. One of
them, taller than the others and more richly dressed, stood slightly in front. Both
Susan and Barbara gasped when they saw them.

'Don't move,' the Doctor murmured as the leader came towards them and
silently inspected each one in turn.

'We are travellers lost upon this mountain,' Ian said, 'and we ask you for
shelter.' He pointed to the tents as a man came out of the main one. The leader
unbuttoned his collar to reveal a hard, determined mouth.

'Hear me, Mongols,' he proclaimed, 'in these parts there live evil spirits who
take to themselves our likeness to deceive us and lead us to our deaths. So let us
now destroy these spirits while they still retain our form or else they will destroy
us.'

'That's not true,' Ian protested, 'we're not devils, we are human beings like
yourselves.'

'Cut them down,' the leader cried and the six warriors came towards them.
'Stop Tegana, put up your scimitars, all of you,' yelled the man Ian had seen

come out of the tent. Tegana turned to him.
'Would you have us killed?' he protested. 'These are evil spirits.'
'I command you, in the name of mighty Kublai Khan, whose seal I carry,

to put up your scimitars,' the man replied. Reluctantly, Tegana obeyed and the
others followed suit. The man looked at the Doctor and then turned to Ian.

'The aged one has mountain sickness,' he said. 'We shall help him to the
tent.' Ian and the man took the Doctor, gasping for air, by his arms and virtually
carried him down the slope. Susan and Barbara were studying the man as they
followed. He was tall and handsome, in his mid-thirties, Barbara thought. He
wore a fur hat, a long leather coat with a fur collar and cuffed and hemmed with
fur trimmings.

'Who do you think he is?.' Susan whispered.
'I was askingmyself the same question,' Barbara replied. 'He's not aMongol,

he's European and he mentioned Kublai Khan, a great Mongol ruler who
governed all of Asia in the second half of the thirteenth century.'

'And according to the TARDIS, we're in 1289,' Susan added.



'Right,' Barbara said, 'and Kublai Khan had in his service a young Venetian
named Marco Polo.'

'I've heard of him,' Susan was excited. 'He told stories of his journeys and
all the marvellous things he'd seen. Do you really think it's him?'

Barbara smiled. 'Even if I'm wrong I'm very grateful to him for saving us
from Tegana, whoever he may be, and his friends.'

As they reached the tent the Doctor admitted he was quite out of breath.
It was a tent inside a tent, double-skinned to keep out the cold, and the inner
one was lined with furs to retain the heat of the fire which burned in the hearth
at the centre. The back of the inner tent was sectioned off into three separate
compartments. There was a carpeted hide ground sheet with stools and small
tables. Ian and the man took the Doctor over to a stool beside the fire and sat
him down. The man clapped his hands twice and a pretty Chinese girl, of Susan's
age, came out of one of the compartments.

'Ping-Cho, we have visitors,' he said, 'who are cold and hungry.'
'Yes, Messer Marco,' she replied as Barbara and Susan exchanged a glance.

Ping-Cho went to a pot suspended over the fire, took a spoon from the hearth,
scooped out some liquid which she poured into a goblet and handed it to the
Doctor.

'Tea, my lord?' she asked in a small sing-song voice.
'And very welcome too, my dear,' the Doctor replied, sipping it. Marco

smiled at the Doctor.
'I fear the liquid is not too warm,' he said apologetically, 'but the cold is so

intense it even robs a flame of its heat.'
'It's not the cold,' Ian said, 'the liquid boils at a lower temperature because

there is so little air up here.'
'The air is responsible?' Marco looked puzzled.
'Rather the lack of it,' Ian replied, 'just as the lack of it gave the Doctor

mountain sickness.' Marco still didn't understand.
'Your family name is Polo, I believe,' Barbara said brightly.
'It is, my lady. I am Marco Polo in the service of the mighty Kublai Khan.'

He smiled. 'But I do not know who you are.'
'We're travellers,' said the Doctor between sips. 'I am the Doctor. This is

my granddaughter, Miss Susan Foreman, Miss Barbara Wright and Mr Ian
Chesterton.' Marco smiled a greeting to each one.

'My companions are the Lady Ping-Cho and the War Lord Tegana.' Susan
smiled at Ping-Cho who joined her hands in prayer and bowed to them. 'We
travel to Shang-Tu,' Marco added.

'That's in China, isn't it?' Barbara asked. Marco looked perplexed.
'I have journeyed to many countries, my lady Barbara, but I have never

heard of China. Shang-Tu is in Cathay.' Barbara put her hand to her forehead.
'Of course, it is,' she said, 'how silly of me.' Marco looked at them, intrigued,

and Tegana stood suspiciously at the entrance to the inner tent.
'You must all be weary.' Marco set about rearranging their sleeping

accommodation, putting Susan with Ping-Cho, giving his compartment to
Barbara and adding that the gentlemen would sleep in the main area. The Doctor
stood up and Ping-Cho took the goblet from him.



'We are deeply in your debt, sir,' he said, 'for you have saved our lives twice-
over.' Tegana's hand tightened around the hilt of his scimitar. Marco smiled at the
Doctor and admitted that he was curious to know why they had been wandering
around on the Plain of Pamir with nightfall rapidly approaching.

'Our caravan broke down up there,' the Doctor waved his hand in the general
direction.

'A wheel, an axle?' Marco enquired.
'Something of that nature,' the Doctor said vaguely.
'Then, either repair it quickly or abandon it,' Marco replied, 'for we must

journey on tomorrow.'
'Tomorrow!' The Doctor echoed the word.
'We cannot stay here,' Marco said, shaking his head. 'Those who travel to

Cathay call this place the roof of the world, to be traversed as quickly as possible.'
Barbara, Ian and Susan glanced at one another. 'So whilst we strike camp, I will
lend you two of my bearers to help you to repair it or take your personal
possessions from it and abandon the caravan where it is.' For the life of him, the
Doctor couldn't think of a suitable reply.



2 Emissary of Peace

Ian stood outside the tent and looked at the moonlit sky. The stars appeared
to be so close he felt he could reach up and touch them. For a few minutes the
silence and stillness were absolute but then he became aware of the sound. It
was a thump, thump, thuummp, thump, thump, thuummp beat which at first he
couldn't identify. Then the truth dawned on him. He was listening to his own
heart, so he decided it was very cold indeed, and went back inside the tent where
Marco and Tegana were sitting beside the fire. The Doctor, wrapped warmly in
his furs was fast asleep. Marco looked at Ian who scooped some tea into a goblet
from the pot suspended above the fire.

'Did you touch a star?' Marco asked with a smile.
'Almost, but my heart said no,' Ian replied. Marco chuckled as Ian sat down

beside them. Tegana's face remained impassive.
Ping-Cho and Susan lay cocooned in their fur beds.
'Are you asleep, Susan?' Ping-Cho whispered.
'Yes,' Susan replied, and they both giggled.
'Where are you from?' Ping-Cho asked.
'That's not an easy question to answer.'
'You do not know where your home is?' Ping-Cho was astonished.
'My grandfather and I have been travelling for a long time,' Susan explained,

'and we have many homes in many places. What about you?'
'I come from Samarkand where my father is a government official.'
'But Marco said he was going to Shang-Tu. Are you on holiday, then?'
'No,' Ping-Cho replied, 'Kublai Khan's summer palace is there and that's

where I shall be married.'
'Married!' Susan's whisper was shocked. 'How old are you?'
'I am in my fifteenth year.'
'So am I. You're much too young to marry.'
'Is it different in your land?' Ping-Cho asked and explained that in

Samarkand it was the custom. Susan wanted to know if Ping-Cho's future
husband was handsome.

'I do not know,' she replied. 'I have never met him.' In the warmth of her
bed, Susan thought about it.

'Why are you marrying him?' she finally asked.
'It has been arranged by my family,' Ping-Cho replied.
'What do you know about him?'
'He's a very important man.'
'Lots of influence, then.'
'Yes.'
'Young, hopefully good-looking and influential. You could do worse, I

suppose.'
'Oh, he's not young, Susan. He's seventy-five years old.'
'He's what?' Susan exploded.
'Ssssshhhh,' Ping-Cho whispered, 'you'll wake everybody up.'
'You're the one who needs waking up,' Susan whispered back.



At dawn whilst the Doctor and Ian were still asleep, Marco and Tegana
went up onto the plateau to look at the TARDIS. Marco walked around it several
times. Tegana stood back watching suspiciously.

'You should have let me kill them,' he said as Marco touched the door, 'they
are evil spirits, sorcerers, magicians.' Marco turned to him.

'Magicians, yes, if the four of them can travel in so small a caravan without
wheels and no oxen to draw it,' he agreed, 'but neither evil spirits nor sorcerers.
I believe them to be travellers though I admit I know not from where they come.
They use different words, their mode of dress is unusual and, in my travels, I
have seen many things which surpass my comprehension but this' - he pointed
to the TARDIS - 'is the strangest of all.'

'Let him explain it,' Tegana replied as Ian came striding towards them.
'Good morning,' he said cheerily, 'I thought I might find you here.'
'This is your caravan?' Marco asked.
'Actually, it's the Doctor's,' Ian answered.
'But it has no wheels,' Marco observed. 'How does it move?'
'It flies,' Ian said casually, 'through the air.' Marco looked at him intently.
'Are you of the Buddhist faith?'
Ian shook his head. 'Why?'
'At the Khan's court in Peking I have seen Buddhist monks make goblets

of wine fly unaided through the air to offer themselves to Kublai's lips,' Marco
replied, adding that although he had seen it he did not understand how they did
it. 'And there is room enough inside for all of you?' he continued.

'Loads,' Ian said. Marco went back to the door.
'You enter here?' he asked.
'But it's locked and the Doctor has the key,' Ian replied.
'And it is damaged,' Marco said. Ian nodded. 'Then we shall make a sledge

and take it with us. But we must make haste,' he added, 'I want us off the Plain
of Pamir by nightfall.' Marco strode away back towards the camp where, under
the Doctor's watchful eye, Ping-Cho was preparing a soup while Susan set out
plates, bowls, spoons and chopsticks on the tables around the fire. Barbara came
out of her compartment.

'That smells good, Ping-Cho,' she said, 'what is it?'
'Bean sprout and chicken broth, Miss Barbara,' Ping-Cho replied.
'With all sorts of other goodies thrown in,' Susan added.
'It's making my mouth water in anticipation,' the Doctor said. Ping-Cho

glanced at him with a smile and inclined her head.
'My lord is kind,' she remarked.
'But it surprises me to find the daughter of a high government official acting

as the cook to Marco Polo's retinue,' the Doctor added.
'I wish to serve, my lord,' Ping-Cho replied, then admitted that among the

Mongols there was a man who called himself a cook but after the first day of
their journey no one else would accord him such an honour.

'His name wouldn't be Tegana, by any chance?' the Doctor teased, but Ping-
Cho took him seriously.

'Oh, no, my lord,' she said, 'the War Lord Tegana is a special emissary from
the camp of a great Tartar ruler named Noghai who has been at war with Kublai
Khan.'



'Mongol fighting Mongol,' Barbara observed.
'The war is ended, Miss Barbara,' Ping-Cho explained. 'Noghai has sued for

peace and Tegana travels to Kublai's court to discuss the terms of the armistice.'
'For an emissary of peace, he has blood-thirsty habits,' the Doctor remarked

dryly.
The inner tent flap opened as Marco, Ian and Tegana came in. Marco came

straight to the point.
'I find your caravan most unusual, Doctor,' he said.
'It is different,' the Doctor conceded.
'Marco has given orders for a sledge to be made to bring the TARDIS here,'

Ian said. The Doctor smiled at Marco.
'How kind of you, sir. I won't delay your journey more than a few days to

effect the repairs.'
Marco shook his head. 'I have told you that we cannot stay here, Doctor,'

he said, 'but we shall spend a few days at Lop.'
'Where's that?' Barbara asked.
'It's a town on the edge of the Gobi desert, Miss Wright.'
'Barbara,' she corrected him. He smiled.
'Beyond Kashgar and Yarkand, Barbara.'
'You'll take us there, my caravan as well?' the Doctor asked, and Marco

told him that he had once transported an entire army with all its equipment from
Cathay to India.

'All without loss,' he emphasised. The Doctor smiled.
'I can work on my caravan as we proceed,' he said.
'No.' Marco's reply was immediate and determined.
'Why not?' the Doctor asked, taken aback. Marco took him by the arm and

drew him to one side out of earshot.
'The Mongols, and the Tartar War Lord Tegana still half-believe you are

evil spirits,' he explained, 'but they also think that outside your caravan you are
harmless. However, should one of you enter it - ' He raised an eyebrow and left
the sentence unfinished. The Doctor rubbed his chin reflectively.

Yes, I see the problem,' he admitted and made up his mind. 'You saved our
lives, Polo. The least we can do is respect your wishes. On my oath, no one will
enter my caravan until we reach Lop.'

'Good,' Marco replied and, turning to the others, said it was time to eat as
there was a lot to be done.

The sledge, made from the sides of a baggage wagon strapped together with
tent stays, was quickly finished. It was pulled up to the TARDIS where, under
the combined direction of Ian and Marco, the snow in front of the ship was dug
away until the top of the sledge was on the same level as the base of the TARDIS.

'We should be able to push it onto the sledge, now,' Ian said, but Marco
had been right when he spoke to the Doctor about the Mongols. They wouldn't
touch it so Ian went back to the camp to fetch more dismantled tent stays which
he and Marco secured around the TARDIS. Marco put a dusting of snow on top
of the sledge, observing that the Doctor's caravan would now slide more easily
onto it. Then he ordered the Mongols to take the ends of the hauls and heave
the TARDIS into place. Once that was done, Ian and Marco strapped it to the
sledge and the Mongols pulled it to the edge of the slope where Marco gave the



command to turn the sledge around so that the hauls were now behind it. Marco
told the Mongols to take the strain and they dug their boots into the snow.

'Ready, Ian?' he asked with a grin.
'When you are, Marco,' Ian replied, and the two of them put their backs

against the TARDIS and edged it over the incline where it became what it was,
a charged sledge, and with whoopings and yellings they all went slithering and
sliding down to the camp where a beady-eyed Doctor awaited them.

'Is this to be a regular occurrence, Polo?' he asked frostily.
'No, Doctor, I give you my word,' Marco replied, 'the worst is over.' Ian

burst out laughing.
Rapidly the camp was struck, the tents and furnishings loaded onto four

baggage wagons with the sledge firmly attached to the last one. The Doctor,
Barbara, Susan and Ping-Cho rode in the first wagon, with Marco, Ian and
Tegana in the second. The Mongols led the oxen and walked alongside the
wagons as the caravan made its slow progress across the plain. Just before dusk
Marco called a halt and the camp was pitched although there were fewer tents for
the Mongols because of the stays being used to secure the TARDIS. Ping-Cho
prepared another soup, hotter this time as they were at a lower altitude and the air
less rarefied. As soon as they had finished supper, everyone, with the exception
of Marco, went to bed, exhausted by the day's efforts. Marco sat, staring at the
flames. His plan had worked; the Doctor had agreed to accompany him to Lop
but, glancing over at the sleeping figure, he wondered what the Doctor's reaction
would be when he told him what he proposed to do then.



3 Down to Earth

At first, progress was slow with no more than three leagues a day covered
as the caravan came down from the Plain of Pamir, but once they reached the
Kashgar valley they more than doubled the daily distance travelled. Still it wasn't
enough for the Doctor who was impatiently itching to repair the TARDIS and
be off. With Marco's permission, Susan and Ping-Cho would dash off exploring
the verdant countryside and woods that surrounded them, while Marco told Ian
tales of his adventures in the service of Kublai Khan. Tegana remained aloof,
only exchanging a word or two with Marco from time to time. Eventually, they
reached Yarkand, a small but bustling town where the Old Silk Road began and
along which the commerce and culture of a thousand years to and from Cathay
had travelled. The oxen were exchanged for horses and the TARDIS, still on its
sledge, was loaded onto a wagon and secured while the Doctor grumbled that
he should be allowed to repair it there. But Marco was adamant that the caravan
should continue its journey and, besides, the Doctor had given his word.

The journey to Lop, through the undulating farmland, was pleasant. Marco,
Ian, Barbara and Tegana were on horseback which meant that the two wagons
for the travellers had, in the first, the Doctor muttering irascibly to himself and,
in the second, Susan with Ping-Cho giggling, gossiping and playing games. The
tent, now without the furs to line it, was pitched in the evenings and Ping-Cho,
with both Barbara and Susan helping, would prepare them a 'proper' meal as the
Doctor described it. But, as they approached Lop, the landscape changed: the
earth became dry and dusty, the outcrops of green fewer and farther between for
Lop was built on the edge of the vast Gobi desert and, whereas Yarkand had been
a town, Lop was little more than an oasis, a natural spring, surrounded by tents
and wooden shacks. But the main building, the way-station or hotel, was well-
appointed. Themanager, Yeng, a dignified Chinese who never took his hands out
of his jacket sleeves, greetedMarco courteously and gave orders for the horses to
be stabled. The baggage train was put into a compound, but the Doctor insisted
that the wagon with the TARDIS be placed in the main courtyard where he could
keep an eye on it. Smiling, Marco agreed with him.

'I shall start work at once,' the Doctor said. Marco raised a hand and advised
the Doctor to relax for a day or two. Their journey had been long and arduous
but now in the comfort of the way-station they could refresh their spirits. Ian
agreed, so reluctantly the Doctor gave in. They were given rooms on the first
floor overlooking the courtyard and Susan opted to share one with Ping-Cho. As
he reclined in his bathtub, the Doctor grudgingly conceded to himself that Marco
had been right to make him rest. All their travel-stained clothes were whisked
away to be cleaned and when they met in their flowing, delicately embroidered
silken robes for a sumptuous dinner the Doctor wore his mandarin hat at a jaunty
angle.

During the meal Barbara remarked that she was surprised to find such
comfort in a place as remote as Lop.

'Kublai Khan has had way-stations built at regular intervals throughout his
domains,' Marco replied.



'Must cost a packet to stay here, though,' Ian observed guiltily. Marco held
out a gold medallion which was attached to a fine gold chain he was wearing
around his neck.

'Those who travel in the Khan's service and wear this seal have the right to
demand anything they may require,' he explained, 'provisions, horses, shelter.'

'The original credit card,' Ian murmured to Barbara who was sitting beside
him. Quickly she clamped her hand over her mouth and did her best to keep a
straight face.

The next morning the Doctor awoke feeling refreshed and energetic after
a good night's sleep in an extremely comfortable bed. His clothes had been
impeccably cleaned and returned to his room while he slept, and he hummed a
little air to himself as he dressed. Then he went downstairs, ate two small Tan
Chiao omelettes stuffed with minced fresh water shrimps and drank a bowl of
tea for breakfast.

'Good morning,' he said brightly to Tegana, who came in from the
courtyard, and announced he was off to work. Tegana did not reply. The Doctor
dabbed his lips with his serviette, took the key to the TARDIS from his pocket
and went to the entrance to the courtyard only to find his way barred by two
Mongols with drawn swords.

'Stand aside,' he ordered but they remained where they were.
'Please sit down, Doctor,' Marco said behind him. The Doctor turned

around.
'What's this about?' he asked, and insisted that Marco call off the Mongols.
'Please be seated,' Marco repeated as Barbara, Ping-Cho and Susan came

down the stairs.
'No,' the Doctor retorted, 'I have work to do and we made an agreement,

Polo.'
'Hear me out, Doctor,' Marco said as Ian joined the others on the stairs. The

Doctor looked around.
'I appear not to have any choice,' he snapped, and sat down folding his arms.

Marco beckoned to Ian, Barbara and the girls to join them. Then he joined his
hands as if he were praying, put his forefingers to his lips for a moment and
turned back to the Doctor.

'My home is Venice,' he said, 'and I left there with my father andmy uncle to
come to Cathay in the year one thousand, two hundred and seventy-one, eighteen
years ago. The journey to Peking took three and a half years. I was twenty-one
when we arrived at Kublai Khan's court. I was an alert young man with a facility
for languages and a willingness to learn. The Khan liked me.' The Doctor sighed
audibly. 'On my twenty-fifth birthday I was given an appointment in his service.'

'1277,' Barbara interrupted. Marco glanced at her.
'Yes. And since then my duties have taken me to every corner of his realm,

Barbara, and beyond it. Two years ago, my father, my uncle and I asked the Khan
for permission to return home. He refused.

Perhaps the three of us had served him too well.' Marco paused and the
Doctor leapt in.

'I don't see the remotest connection between the story of your life and my
repairing the TARDIS,' he said. Marco spread out his arms.



'Doctor, I have not seen my home for many years,' he replied. 'I want to go
back.' The Doctor unfolded his arms and waved one in the air.

'Ask Kublai Khan again,' he suggested. 'You never know, this time he may
oblige.'

'I intend to ask him again,' Marco's voice was firm, but I will not go empty-
handed. I shall offer him a gift so magnificent that he will not be able to refuse
me this time.' Ian got the message.

'The TARDIS,' he exclaimed, 'you're talking about the TARDIS.' Marco
turned to face him.

'Yes, Ian, the Doctor's flying caravan,' he said, as the Doctor jumped to his
feet.

'Polo, you're mad,' he cried incredulously. Marco turned back to face him.
'You can make another,' he said.
'In Shang-Tu or Peking?' The Doctor shook his head in disbelief.
'You do me an injustice,' Marco protested. 'I won't leave you stranded in

Cathay, just as I did not let you die on the Plain of Pamir. No, you will come
with me to Venice and make another one there.' The Doctor began to chuckle.

'No, Polo, no,' he said, his shoulders jiggling.
Ian intervened. 'It's impossible, Marco.' Marco looked at him and pointed

at the Doctor.
'Surely, all things are possible for a man who possesses a flying caravan,'

he insisted. Ian argued that it would need all kinds of metals and equipment
which could not be found in Venice and that Marco had no idea of the problems
involved. The Doctor clutched his sides in suppressed mirth.

'Nor do you, young man,' the Doctor chortled, looking at Ian.
'Then journey home by boat. We trade with every port in the world,' Marco

insisted, 'and you'll find all you need. It may take you longer, but you'll reach
home eventually.'

'Eventually.' The word came out as a squeak. 'He doesn't know what he's
saying. The man's a lunatic,' said the Doctor. Marco's face was set grim as he
turned to the Doctor.

'No. Desperate. There are many men who are jealous of the Polo influence
at the court. And the Khan suffers from an affliction for which there is no cure.'

'What is it?' Barbara asked quietly.
'Old age, Barbara,' Marco replied, and added that if the Khan were to die

before they managed to leave Cathay he would probably never see Venice again.
'That's your problem, Polo, not mine,' the Doctor said as he tried to pull

himself together.
'I have just made it yours, Doctor.'
'You will see Venice again, Marco,' Barbara said.
'I intend to.' Marco was adamant.
'But what makes you think the Doctor's caravan would be a suitable gift for

the Khan?' Ian asked, and pointed out that only the Doctor could make it fly.
'I told you about the Buddhist monks making goblets of wine fly through

the air. They will uncover its secrets,' he replied, as the Doctor all but doubled
up with laughter, which Marco ignored. 'A caravan that flies, Ian. Do you realise
what that would mean to the Khan? It would make him the most powerful ruler



the world has ever known. Stronger than Hannibal, mightier than Alexander the
Great.'

'Oh, dear, oh, dearie me,' the Doctor gasped with tears of laughter streaming
down his cheeks. Marco looked at him.

'Laugh if you will, Doctor, but my mind is made up,' he said. 'Your caravan
goes with me to Shang-Tu. Now, give me the key and on my oath I will not enter
it until we reach the court.'

Helpless with laughter and to the astonishment of Susan, Barbara and Ian,
the Doctor held it out. Marco took the key, strode to the entrance, called off the
Mongol guards and went out into the courtyard. The Doctor collapsed in a chair,
almost sobbing with laughter.

'Oh, dear, oh, dearie me,' he kept repeating. Susan ran over and shook him.
'Grandfather, grandfather,' she cried, 'why are you laughing? It's serious.'

Barbara and Ian came over to him.
'Marco means it,' Barbara said. The Doctor took his handkerchief from his

pocket and wiped his eyes.
'Yes, I know he does,' he admitted.
'What are you going to do about it?' Ian asked. The Doctor looked at him

for a moment and burst out laughing again.
'I haven't the foggiest notion,' he gasped finally.
Two people who had witnessed the confrontation without making any

comment were Ping-Cho, who didn't understand it, and the War Lord Tegana,
who did, and was in the service of the great Khan Noghai.



4 Singing Sands

Relations were strained during the next few days while Marco prepared the
caravan for the scorching sands of the Gobi desert. The Doctor kept to himself,
brooding in his room, and most of the time refusing to eat the food which Susan
took up to him. Naturally, the others were concerned about him and Ian tried
remonstrating with Marco who ignored his protests and went grimly about the
preparations for the journey. Tegana stood back, watching it all with interest.

Then, one evening as they were eating dinner in silence, Susan came down
from the Doctor's room with his tray of food untouched.

'Grandfather won't eat,' she said, putting the tray on the table.
'Tell him he must.' Marco spoke quietly. 'We start our journey in the

morning and the Doctor will need all the strength he can muster.' Barbara stood
up, looked at Susan and Ian and took the tray.

'We'll all tell him,' she said and the three of them went upstairs. Susan
knocked on the Doctor's door.

'It's us, grandfather,' she said, 'maywe come in?' There was a non-committal
grunt from inside, so Susan opened the door and they entered the room. The
Doctor was sitting disconsolately on the edge of his bed. Barbara set the tray
on the table and explained why he had to eat. The Doctor moved to a stool and
stared without interest at the bowls of food in front of him.

'Come on, grandfather, please,' Susan pleaded, 'we need you.' The Doctor
looked at them.

'It's the first time I've ever let that key go out of my possession,' he said, 'I
don't know what came over me.'

'You'll get it back,' Ian replied confidently. 'Mister Messer Marco Polo's no
match for you, and you know it. Now, eat something.' The Doctor toyed with his
chopsticks for a few moments. Then he looked at them and smiled.

No, he isn't, is he?' he remarked before tucking in.
Later, Tegana walked to one of the tents under the palm trees around the

oasis and went inside. The Tartar sitting there jumped to his feet and bowed.
'I greet the War Lord Tegana,' he said.
'Our journey commences tomorrow,' Tegana stated. 'Follow us with a spare

horse. On the fourth night I shall walk back to meet you and we shall return to
Lop. Wait a few days and then ride back into the Gobi to collect a present for
the all-powerful Noghai that will bring Kublai Khan to his knees.'

'As the War Lord Tegana commands,' the Tartar replied and bowed again.
The next morning the Doctor came bouncing down to breakfast.
'Good morning, everybody,' he said cheerily and then singled out an

astonished Marco for an individual greeting before ordering a bowl of tea and
two Tan Chiao omelettes stuffed with chopped water-chestnuts and pork whilst
observing that no one should go out into the desert on an empty stomach.

The four wagon caravan set out from Lop. Everyone, except the Doctor,
was on horseback with Susan and Ping-Cho sharing a horse. The Doctor sat
beside the driver of the lead wagon which contained their food and water, the
second and third wagons carried their tents, cots and baggage while the fourth



had the TARDIS and several chickens in a cage strapped onto it. Theymade good
progress along the Old Silk Road on the first day with more than five leagues
covered before Marco gave the order to pitch two tents, one for themselves, the
other for the four Mongol drivers. Barbara, Ping-Cho and Susan prepared their
evening meal while Ian helped Marco to decant some water from the gourds
which hung in the first wagon.

'Howmuch water does a caravan like ours use to cross the Gobi?' Ian asked.
'One gourd every five days,' Marco replied, 'so I have allowed eight gourds

to carry us to the other side.'
'The bones of many men who thought they carried enough lie bleached in

the desert sun,' Tegana said from behind them.
'So we shall all exercise restraint,' Marco added with a smile.
They ate dinner outside the tent under the starlit sky.
'If it's like this all the way, it'll be very pleasant,' Ian commented as he sipped

his coffee. Marco's smile was grim.
'Never trust the desert, Ian,' he said. 'This sea of sand will seduce you one

minute and betray you the next. It will try to bake you during the day and,
sometimes, freeze you during the night. And if you believe in spirits and devils,
they live out here. You will hear them.' He finished his coffee and glanced at the
Doctor. 'Care for a game of chess?' he asked.

'Very kind of you, Polo, but these old bones of mine are rather weary, so
I think I'll turn in shortly,' the Doctor replied. Whilst admitting that he wasn't
the best player in the world, Ian took up Marco's challenge. Marco went into the
tent and returned with a leather case which contained a box made of ivory and
red coral squares so that when it was opened the whole surface made the chess
board. Inside the box were the pieces in ivory and coral.

'May I?' Barbara asked, reaching out for the coral king.
'Of course,' Marco replied. Barbara picked it up. The piece had been

superbly and delicately carved in the shape of a great Khan seated on his throne.
'Ivory or coral, Ian?' Marco asked.
'Oh, coral, Ian,' Barbara said, setting the Khan on his square. When all the

pieces were in place even the Doctor admitted it was the most beautiful chess
set he had ever seen. Marco smiled.

'When one moves pieces like these, Doctor, one has the impression one
plays a better game.' The Doctor chuckled. Tegana stood unsmiling.

'It is an exercise in the strategies of war,' he proclaimed. 'Two equally
balanced armies deployed upon a field of battle and each commander determined
to be the one who cries "Shah Mat".' Ian looked at him.

'Shah mat?' he queried, and then realised what it meant.
'The Shah, the Khan, the King is dead,' Marco said. 'Your opening, Ian.'

Thirty-seven moves later Marco quietly said 'Shah mat', and Ian nodded.
'Yes,' he conceded ruefully, 'checkmate.' The Doctor, still there with the

others, observed that he thought Ian had put up a jolly good fight and then went
to bed.

After dinner on the second day, the Doctor accepted Marco's challenge and
routed him decisively on the twenty-sixth move.

'Shah mat, I believe.' The Doctor's eyes twinkled.



'Yes, checkmate, as Ian would say,' Marco agreed with a grin, 'I should have
known better than to take you on.' Silently Barbara and Ian agreed with him.

'Tomorrow, when the caravan stops,' Tegana said, 'it will be between us,
Marco.'

'Very well,' Marco replied affably.
Once, during the third day of their journey, Marco looked back over his

shoulder and thought he saw three horsemen and a riderless horse following
them. But they disappeared in the haze of the shimmering sand and he decided
it had been a mirage.

That evening's game of chess had a tension about it, a feeling, unlike the
other two, that much more was at stake than a cry of 'Shah mat'. Tegana strutted
up and down in front of the board making his moves with extravagant gestures,
exulting aloud every time he took one of his opponent's pieces, while Marco sat
quietly, determined not to be distracted by Tegana's behaviour.

Thankfully, the match ended in a draw which the Doctor suspected Marco
had done deliberately.

There was not a breath of wind on the fourth day's travel and Marco was
uneasy although he tried to conceal it. From time to time he would squint at the
cloudless sky or glance back over his shoulder. The Doctor remarked that it was
the hottest day yet and Ian reminded him that they were journeying further and
further into the desert.

Ping-Cho and Susan played their match after dinner. It ended in a draw
which the Doctor knew Susan had planned. Later the two girls lay in their section
of the tent with the outside flap open to let in any night breeze that might come up.

'Asleep?' Susan whispered.
'No, I was thinking,' Ping-Cho replied.
'What about?'
'How peaceful the desert is.'
'It's a lovely night.'
'With the moon it resembles a vast silver sea.'
'The metal seas of Venus,' Susan murmured.
'Where?'
'Far, far away.' She hesitated for a moment. 'I've never walked in a moonlit

desert. Shall we?'
'If you tell me about the metal seas.'
They got out of their cots and wearing their nightdresses slipped out

barefoot into the warm stillness of the night. Susan looked around.
'I dig this,' she exclaimed, 'it's crazy.'
'Ssshhh, the guard'll hear you,' Ping-Cho warned and then looked puzzled.

'What are you going to unearth and why is it insane?' she asked. Susan giggled.
'It's a way of saying you like something very much,' she explained.
'This language of yours is very strange,' Ping-Cho replied, 'but I think I dig

it.'
They saw Tegana come out of the tent, say a few words to the guard and

stride off across the desert.
'Do you think he's taking the night air?' Susan asked.
'No. He's going somewhere,' Ping-Cho replied.



'In the middle of the desert?' Susan's curiosity was aroused. 'Why not follow
him and see?'

'Crazy,' Ping-Cho said and, keeping out of sight of the guard, they followed
Tegana into the desert. 'We mustn't get lost, though,' she warned. Susan glanced
at the night sky.

'Don't worry, I'll find our way back by the stars.'
They had tracked Tegana for half an hour across the dunes when the wind

came up. It was stiflingly hot as though someone had opened an enormous oven
door and they saw the cloud swirling across the desert towards them.

'It's a sandstorm,' Ping-Cho cried, 'we must return to the caravan quickly.'
'No, it's too far,' Susan replied, 'we need shelter here.'
'But where?' Already the wind was tugging at their nightdresses and grains

of sand were stinging their faces. Susan looked around desperately.
'Down the side of this dune,' she yelled and the two of them slithered and

slid down to the bottom, huddled together and covered their faces with their
nightdresses. Then the sandstorm struck in all its fury as they cowered against the
dune for protection. The searing wind howled and screamed all about them, then
suddenly subsided although the sand still swirled around them. For a moment
there was silence and then they heard it.

What's that?' Ping-Cho's voice quavered.
'It sounds like people moaning,' Susan replied and then listened again. 'No,

now they're chuckling.' As 'the two of them clutched each other, the chuckle
became laughter which grew in intensity until they were both enveloped in a
hideous, demoniacal, hysterical shrieking.

"That sounds like all the devils in hell,' Ian said to Marco as they secured
the main flap of the tent.

"I did warn you about the desert,' Marco replied as Barbara came out of her
compartment.

'What - what's happening?' She sounded scared. Ian smiled at her.
'It's the sandstorm,' he said.
'But that awful laughter,' she exclaimed.
'Is simply the wind shifting the sand,' Marco explained calmly. 'It's a

phenomenon.'
'It's terrifying,' Barbara retorted.
'Not always,' Marco said and told her that at times it could be like musical

instruments being played, drums being beaten and cymbals clashed, or it could
sound as though a host of travellers were chatting amongst themselves as they
crossed the desert, and yet again sometimes it could sound like a single familiar
voice calling out your name. 'Almost all people who cross the Gobi fear the
singing sands,' he added with a smile.

'Not the Doctor,' Ian remarked, looking at the sleeping figure.
'I'll check the girls,' Barbara said and went to their section of the tent. As

she opened the inner flap she was struck in the face by flying sand.
'Ian,' she yelled and both Ian and Marco ran to her side.
'We must close the outside flap,' Marco said.
'But where's Susan? Where's Ping-Cho?' Barbara cried.
'One thing at a time,' Marco replied sharply, 'the flap.' Both he and Ian took

a deep breath then, holding their hands in front of their faces, plunged into the



swirling sand to grab the outside flap which was thrashing wildly in the wind.
As they secured it the sand subsided.

'Open the inner flap fully, Barbara, so we can see,' Marco said. She unlaced
it completely and went into the compartment.

'They're not here,' Ian said quietly.
'Then where . . .?' Barbara started to ask and then answered herself. 'Out

there?' Ian nodded.
'There's nothing we can do until the storm's over, so we'll wake Tegana and

go in search of them as soon as possible,' Marco said.
'What about the Doctor? He's Susan's grandfather.' Barbara reminded them.

Ian and Marco exchanged a glance.
'Let's not worry him yet,' Ian replied and they went over to Tegana's bedroll

to discover it was empty as well.
'He must be out there, too,' Ian exclaimed. Marco knitted his brows.
'But why? Why are they out there?' he asked.
Although the sand still swirled around them, the wind had almost

completely died down when Susan heard the Doctor calling her.
'Ssuuussaaannn.'
'That's grandfather,' she said, 'they must be looking for us.'
'Not in this, not yet,' Ping-Cho replied.
'Ssuuussaannn.'
'There he is again. I know my grandfather's voice,' Susan insisted.
'Calling out like that, he'd choke on sand,' Ping-Cho said. 'It's a desert spirit.'
'There's no such thing. It's grandfather.' Susan stood up. 'We're over here,

grand . . .' she called out, but stopped short with a mouthful of sand.
Ping-Cho shook her head. 'It's not him. It's a devil, a devil, believe me.'

Then she looked up at the top of the dune and saw him there, a shadowy figure
blurred by sand. Ping-Cho screamed and got a mouthful of land, too.

The storm stopped as quickly as it had struck. The desert was still again,
the moon riding high in the star-studded sky. Barbara, Ian and Marco were on
the point of setting out to search for Susan and Ping-Cho when they saw them
with Tegana approaching the caravan.

'You've had us half-worried to death,' Barbara chided. Susan hung her head.
'It was such a lovely night we went for a walk,' she said lamely. Marco

raised a remonstrating finger.
'Don't you ever do that again,' he ordered.
'I also chose to go for a walk, will you forbid me that as well?' Tegana asked.

Marco turned to face him.
'No one leaves this caravan at night without my permission.'
'I told the guard, was not that sufficient?' Tegana asked.
'No, the guard must come and tell me.' Marco was adamant and reminded

them that he was responsible for everyone's life. Then he told them to sleep as
it would soon be dawn and their journey must continue.

'It's been a frightening ordeal for them,' Barbara said looking at Ping-Cho
and Susan, 'for all of us, in fact. Can't we spend one day here to let everyone
recover from it?'

'No, Barbara, I'm sorry,' Marco replied.
'But, surely, one day won't make that much difference?' she argued.



'One day without progress is a day's water wasted,' he retaliated, 'and in the
desert that can be the difference between life and death.' He turned to Tegana.
'Am I not right?' he asked, and the War Lord agreed with him.



5 Desert of Death

With the exception of the Doctor everyone was tired yet the day's progress
was good, the caravan covering five leagues beforeMarco gave the order to pitch
the camp for the night. There were no volunteers for a game of chess after dinner
and soon the main tent was still. In their compartment Ping-Cho and Susan lay
drowsily in their cots looking out at the stars. Susan scratched her head.

'I still haven't got all the sand out of my hair,' she murmured.
'There were moments last night when I was sure I would never lie here

again,' Ping-Cho replied, snuggling down under her covers.
'Do you believe what Tegana told Marco about going for a walk?' Susan

whispered.
'No.' Ping-Cho struggled to keep her eyes open. 'He's not the sort of man

who goes for a walk because it's a nice night.'
'But whywould he lie toMarco?' Susan asked. 'He's an importantWar Lord,

an emissary from, from - '
'Noghai,' Ping-Cho said dreamily.
'To Kublai Khan,' Susan continued. 'Why would someone like that lie about

walking in the desert?'
'I don't know,' Ping-Cho slurred her words.
'Odd, isn't it?' Susan yawned.
'What's odd?'
'The fact that he did,' Susan yawned again and closed her eyes.
It was after midnight when Tegana stirred and, arming himself with his

dagger, slipped silently out of the tent. Lurking in the shadows, he looked around
for the guard who was leaning with his back to Tegana against the side of the
supply wagon. Tegana crept up behind him and with one deft movement slit his
throat. The guard died without a sound. Then Tegana cut the ropes securing the
wagon's canopy and looked at the seven full gourds of water. One by one he
split them open and let the water spill into the desert sand. The gourd they were
using he left and went back to his bedroll, sleeping soundly until the alarm was
given at dawn.

While the Mongol bearers buried their companion, Marco took stock of the
situation. They were four days out from Lop which meant that the gourd they
were using had only one day's supply of water left.

'And if we ration it?' Ian asked.
'Three or four days at best,' Marco replied.
'Then we've enough to return to Lop,' Ian said. Marco shook his head.
'No, Ian, that's the one thing we cannot, dare not, do.'
'Why?' Barbara asked.
'Because this was done by bandits. It's happened before, though never to

me,' Marco replied. 'They follow you out into the desert, then one night this
happens and the caravan is forced to turn back. And when everyone is weakened
through lack of water, they attack. Strange, I thought we were being followed
two days ago but I decided it was a mirage.'

'Pity,' the Doctor murmured.



'Then we shall stand and fight,' Tegana said, drawing his sword. The Doctor
gave him an old-fashioned look and turned to Marco.

'Is there another alternative?' he asked.
'There is a small oasis, Doctor, to the north,' Marco replied, 'but it's one

week's journey away.'
'But if we pressed hard, Marco, if we kept going day night, how long then?'

Ian was determined. Marco ran the palm of his hand across his face.
'Five days,' he replied, and pointed out that with the water rationed they

would be growing weaker all the time so it might still be too far away. 'And there
is another danger,' he added. 'Bandits always camp near an oasis.'

'But you're not talking of the same bandits,' the Doctor observed.
'No.'
'If we turn back for Lop an attack is certain, but if we strive to reach the

oasis there is the possibility that no bandits will be encamped.' The Doctor turned
to Marco. 'True, Polo?' Marco nodded.

'What you say makes sense, Doctor,' he conceded. We strike north.'
'I will not accompany you,' Tegana proclaimed, putting his sword back in

its scabbard. 'I do not fear these bandits.' He announced that he would ride back
to Lop but he wanted his ration of water for the journey. Marco refused, stating
that as the commander of the caravan he was responsible to Kublai Khan for
Tegana's safety and that they would journey north together.

The caravan set off but the sand was no longer packed as on the Old Silk
Road. There were stretches where it was firm but suddenly the horses would
sink into it to their shanks or the wagon wheels to their axles and a slow, tedious
struggle was needed to release them.

As they journeyed deeper into the desert the days became hotter and the
nights cooler so Marco ordered that the caravan stopped between mid-morning
until mid-afternoon. The tents were no longer pitched but sections were used as
canopies attached to the wagons giving shelter from the scorching sun. But each
day their progress diminished, five leagues, four, three, two and, finally, one, yet
they were still four leagues from the oasis. Just before the end of their rest period
on the fifth afternoon, Marco gave everyone a ration of water. As Ian sipped his,
he looked at Marco.

'How much is left?' he asked.
'None,' Marco replied. 'We have no water until we reach the oasis.'
'Or until the oasis comes to us,' the Doctor observed dryly. Ian clicked his

fingers.
'That's it, Doctor,' he exclaimed. 'One of us rides on ahead, fills the gourd

and brings it back.'
'And if there are bandits?' Marco asked.
'We're in trouble enough as it is, so what's the difference?' Ian replied.
'You are from the Occident,' Tegana interjected, 'but I am of their race, a

Tartar, and my horse is strong. I shall fetch the water.' Marco thanked him and
said they would journey towards the oasis as best they could.

'No, wait here,' Tegana said, but Marco shook his head.
'One step nearer to you is one step closer to water,' he insisted. Tegana

shrugged, picked up the empty gourd, slung it across his horse's back in front of
the saddle and, mounting, rode off across the desert.



The thought of water spurred everyone to greater efforts to close the
distance between the caravan and the oasis but during the early evening the
Doctor collapsed from exhaustion.

'Grandfather!' Susan screamed as she ran to his side.
'We'll rig a cot for him in a wagon,' Marco said.
'To be jostled and bumped about?' Barbara protested. 'He needs to rest in

comfort. In the TARDIS.'
'How can that be?' Marco exclaimed. 'The flying caravan sits in a wagon

yet you say the Doctor would be more comfortable in it. I do not understand.' He
fingered the key on the chain with the Khan's seal that hung around his neck.

'Take Barbara's word for it,' Ian was blunt.
'Please, Messer Marco,' Susan pleaded. Marco took off the chain and

handed it to Susan.
'The Doctor may ride to the oasis in his caravan and you may travel with

him, Susan,' he said, 'but Barbara and Ian remain with me.'
'Fair enough,' Ian agreed, 'but you'll allow me to see the Doctor to his bed?'

Marco nodded and Ian picked up theDoctor, and carried him over to the TARDIS
as Susan clambered onto the wagon to unlock the door. Using the Doctor's
pencil-torch, they took him inside, went to his room and laid him on his bed.

'More than anything, he needs water,' Ian remarked.
'Without power the water-producer won't work,' Susan said, adding that if

only Marco had let her grandfather repair the energy-distributor they would not
be in such a predicament.

'We wouldn't even be here,' Ian reminded her as he handed her the torch,
closed the door behind him, jumped off the wagon and walked over to Marco.
'The Doctor's in a bad way,' he said, 'and without water he won't last another
twenty-four hours.' Marco looked at him with a grim face.

'None of us will, Ian, I know the desert,' he replied. 'Our lives are in Tegana's
hands.' Then he gave the order to break camp.

Tegana reached the oasis before sunset. He approached it cautiously but
no one was there. His horse lapped up water greedily as Tegana rinsed his face
and with cupped hands slurped it into his mouth. Then he stood up and turned
towards the desert.

'Here's water, Marco Polo,' he shouted, 'come and drink it.'
With nightfall a freezing wind swept down from the north.
'How can it be so cold in the desert?' Barbara shivered as she asked Ian who

explained that, as hot air rises, cold air sweeps in to replace it, adding that they
were not that far south of the Mongolian steppes.

'You're too clever by half,' she murmured, wrapping her cloak more tightly
around her.

The caravan struggled on through the bitterly cold night until dawn when
the wind died down and the sun rose. It was then that the Doctor felt the drop
of water on his cheek. He opened his eyes and felt the walls. They were soaking
wet. Susan was still asleep in a chair beside his bed.

'Susan, wake up,' he croaked, 'there's condensation everywhere. Fetch
sponges and jugs quickly before it evaporates.' Susan switched on the torch and
both of them worked frantically for the next half hour mopping up every drop.
By the time the TARDIS was dry they had four full jugs. Then they went outside



and shouted to Marco to stop the caravan. They set down the jugs on the wagon
and the Doctor locked the door.

'You had this in your flying caravan?' Marco demanded accusingly while
Ping-Cho rationed out the water to everyone.

'In a manner of speaking, yes,' the Doctor replied calmly.
'Why did you conceal it until now?' Marco was furious.
'Because it wasn't there until this morning,' the Doctor answered.
'Condensation.' Ian clicked his fingers.
'Precisely, Chesterton,' the Doctor replied and Ian explained to Marco that

the hot air trapped inside the TARDIS had cooled out during the night and
become water on the walls. Marco shook his head.

'So much water in so small a caravan, I don't understand it.' He sounded
perplexed.

'There are a lot of things you don't understand, Polo,' the Doctor replied.
'Now shall we continue our journey?' Marco held out his hand.

'The Khan's seal and the key, if you please, Doctor,' he said. The Doctor
handed him the chain. As Marco took it he smiled.

'Thank you for saving our lives,' he said.
When Tegana saw the caravan on the horizon, he hastily filled the gourd

and rode out to meet them with a tale of bandits at the oasis during the night,
forcing him to hide until they rode north towards Karakorum in the morning.



6 A Tale of Hashashins

As the slits in the gourds needed stitching, a task Marco gave to the Mongol
bearers, he declared that they would spend the day and the night at the oasis
before moving on the following morning. The Doctor sat in the shade of a palm
tree beside the water-hole and mused.

'Bandits,' he said derisively to no one in particular.
'I beg your pardon, Doctor?' Ian replied as he lay half-dozing in the sun.
'Are we agreed, Chesterton, that last night was cold?' the Doctor asked.

Without waiting for a reply he launched himself into a dissertation on the general
appearance of the oasis, remarking on its tidiness and emphasising the lack of
evidence of a fire. 'Not a cinder, my dear fellow, anywhere, but we are as one
that it was cold last night.'

'Bitterly so, sir,' Ian replied.
'So what did they do, these bandits, sit and shiver?' the Doctor asked.

Barbara, who had been filling a jug with water, looked at him.
'Isn't it possible that they didn't want anyone to know they were here?' she

said.
'Possible, my dear young woman, but improbable. Of whom would they be

afraid? Other bandits? I doubt it. And certainly not travellers like us. No, no,
there were no bandits here last night and Tegana lied because he had no intention
of bringing water back to us.'

'But without the condensation we'd've died of thirst,' Ian exclaimed.
'That is my point, Chesterton.'
'But why would he have let that happen?' Barbara asked.
'I have my theory,' the Doctor replied, rubbing his hands together whilst

eyeing Ian and Barbara conspiratorially, 'but let us see what happens next.'
At dawn, after a peaceful night, the caravan left the oasis and travelled

south-east towards the city of Tun-Huang some thirty leagues away. It took them
six uneventful days to cover the distance and when Susan saw the city on the
horizon she remarked to Ping-Cho that she had never seen so many spires before.

'Tun-Huang is a city famous for its temples,' Ping-Cho replied and Barbara
who was riding alongside them asked if the Caves of the Thousand Buddhas
were in the vicinity.

'Yes, they are,' Ping-Cho replied.
'And the Cave of Five Hundred Eyes, Barbara,' Marco added and asked if

she had ever seen any drawings of it. Barbara admitted that she had never even
heard of it but the name intrigued her.

'On the walls are carved the faces of two hundred and fifty evil men who
lived there,' Marco explained. They were called the Hashashins.'

'Hashashins,' Susan repeated.
'So named because they used a drug called hashish,' Marco added.
'Are any of them still alive?' Susan asked. Marco shook his head and said

they were all put to the sword twenty years previously by a great Mongol
conqueror named Hulagu.

'But the cave is haunted,' Marco added, 'and at night their eyes glow.'



'How fascinating,' Barbara replied. Marco cautioned her to beware but
Barbara laughed and said she wasn't scared of ghosts.

'I know a story about Hulagu and the Hashashins,' Ping-Cho said.
'Tell it to us,' Susan asked.
'Not now, Susan. Later, whenwe are at the way-station,' she said, explaining

that it needed preparation. Marco winked at her.
The way-station was similar to the one they had stayed in at Lop, with

comfortable accommodation and good food. Chenchu, the manager, was a
chubby little Chinese who greeted them extravagantly and showed them to their
rooms. Under the Doctor's supervision, with Ian as an on-looker, the wagon with
the TARDIS was placed in the central courtyard. When the Mongol bearers left,
the Doctor nudged Ian in the ribs.

'Now that we shall be staying in places like this from time to time, I shall
be able to start work,' he muttered.

'I don't quite grasp your meaning, Doctor,' Ian replied.
'The circuit, dear boy, the energy distributor.'
'Aren't you forgetting something?'
The Doctor waved a dismissive hand in the air. 'Everyone'll be much less

vigilant so I shall be able to sneak into the TARDIS and get on with it.'
'But you handed over the key to Marco at the oasis.'
'A key, Chesterton.' The Doctor raised the forefinger of his right hand to

emphasise the point. 'Not that he would know how to use it.'
'Have you got what I think you've got?' Ian grinned mischievously.
'You don't think I spent the entire night sleeping, do you?' The Doctor

sounded quite indignant. Ian chuckled.
'You made another.' The Doctor widened his eyes in innocence. 'Why, you

sly old fox,' Ian exclaimed.
They all bathed and changed into the flowing silk robes provided by

Chenchu, and once refreshed went downstairs for their evening meal. The
Doctor, as the doyen of the caravan, was once again jauntily wearing a
mandarin's hat and they dined on sesame seed pings followed by soochow
chiang, a delicious mixture of pork, mushrooms and bamboo shoots served with
a succulent sauce and rice wine. When everyone was finished, Marco suggested
they should drink their tea in the way-station's lounge. As they were going
through to it, Susan saw Ping-Cho slip away upstairs. She began to follow her
but Marco stopped her gently with his hand.

'Come and take your tea,' he said smiling and led her into the room.
When Ping-Cho returned, Susan didn't recognise her at first. She was

wearing a long robe in blue silk with a high collar that came up to her jaw line.
Over the robe she wore a knee-length red silk jacket with narrow lapels and
billowing sleeves, which was secured around her waist by a yellow sash knotted
on one side. Both were richly brocaded, the sash with small butterflies of every
colour, the jacket with fawns and flowers and gold and silver stars on the lapels.
Slipped over her fingertips were long rainbow-hued nails and in each hand she
held an open fan delicately decorated with scenes of people walking in luxuriant
Chinese gardens. Her face was powdered white, her cheeks rose, her lips a soft
red and her eyes thinly lined in black up to her temples. From her ears hung short
fine gold chains with a cluster of small pearls at the ends. Her hair was piled



high on her head and kept in place by three sculptured combs, the two outer ones
being coral and the centre one ivory.

She entered the room with short shuffling steps which made her appear as
though she were floating. She stopped, fluttered her fans, and bowed. Everyone,
even Tegana, applauded and she began to tell her story in a lilting voice at the
same time miming it with appropriate gestures of her arms, hands and fans:
'Gracious maidens, gentle lords Pray attend me while I tell my tale Of Ala-eddin,
the Old Man of the Mountains Who by devious schemes, evil designs And foul
murders ruled the land. No host of arms, no vast array Of banners served this
wicked lord They were but few, ruthless, reckless men Who obeyed his cruel
commands. Thus did he persuade them: Promising paradise, he gave his
followers A potent draught andwhile they slept Transported them to a vale where
streams Of milk and honey, wine and water flowed.

Here were gardens and flowers in bloom

Of every hue and essence, here, too

Golden pavilions that outshone the sun,

And even the stars of heaven envied

The bejewelled interiors strewn

With silks, tapestries and treasures.

Hand-maidens, dulcet-voiced, soft of face

Attended them and thus bemused

Did they dwell in this man-made paradise

Until Ala-eddin, intent upon some evil deed,

Proffered again the hashish draught

And brought them sleeping to his castle.

Awakening, they cried "are we cast out

Of paradise?" "Not so, go abroad,

Seek out my enemies and strike them down

But care not for your lives.

Paradise is eternal." Thus terror

Stalked the land for many years



Until the day came mighty Hulagu

To stand before Ala-eddin's lair

For three long years in siege

And thus fell Ala-eddin and the Hashashins.

Now honest hands reap harvests of life

From the soil where death and evil reigned

And those who journey through the vale

In wonder are heard to say
"Tis truly paradise today." '

Ping-Cho fluttered her fans in front of her face and bowed as everyone stood
up applauding and crowding around her.

'That was delightful, my dear, congratulations,' the Doctor said.
'My lord is kind,' Ping-Cho replied.
'Thank you, Ping-Cho,' a smiling Marco added.
'Yes, it was wonderful,' Ian agreed and turned to Susan. 'Did you know that

the Hashashins gave their name to the English language?'
'Assassins,' Susan replied, 'but I always thought that Ala-eddin's lair was

on a mountain in Persia.'
'It was,' Ping-Cho agreed, 'Mount Alumet.'
(Out of the corner of her eye, Barbara saw Tegana surreptitiously sidle out

to the courtyard and, on the spur of the moment, decided to follow him.)
'Then who were the Hashashins in the cave?' Susan asked.
'Some of Ala-eddin's sect,' Marco replied. 'He had them hidden everywhere

awaiting his commands and longing to return to paradise. Here at Tun-Huang,
they were in the Cave of Five Hundred Eyes. It's on the road to Su-Chow about
a third of a league away.'

Tegana left the way-station on foot which intrigued Barbara as she kept him
in sight through the town and onto the road for Su-Chow. When Tegana reached
the Cave of Five Hundred Eyes, he went inside.

'Malik,' he called, 'Malik.' From the shadows of a passageway at the back
of the cave an old, bearded Tartar shuffled forward.

'Who calls my name?' his voice quavered.
'The War Lord Tegana in the service of Noghai Khan.' Malik bowed.
'We have waited for you,' he said.
'You need wait no more, old man,' Tegana replied and asked what word

Malik had from Noghai.
'You shall hear it,' Malik beckoned to him and led him along the passageway

from the roof of which hung stalactites. Reaching up, Malik twisted one of them
and part of the rock wall swung open to reveal an inner chamber. They went



inside and were confronted by three Tartars, one of whom had one side of his
face disfigured by a sabre slash.

'In the name of Noghai Khan, welcome,' he said and with their right hands
they clasped each other by the wrist.

'What have you to tell me, Acomat?' Tegana asked.
"He has formed his army and marches now on Karakorum to await word

of your success,' Acomat replied.
'I shall not fail Noghai,' Tegana boasted.
'You did at Lop,' Acomat reminded him. 'You were to meet our couriers on

the fourth night in the desert.'
'There was a sandstorm,' Tegana said and recounted the events which had

followed it.
'What is required of us in Tun-Huang?' Acomat asked.
'Follow us as we journey on, then when I give the signal, attack and take

the old magician's caravan to Noghai while I ride to Kublai's court at Sheng-Tu.'
'What about Polo and those who travel with him?' A hard glint came into

Acomat's eyes.
'Put them to the sword,' Tegana replied as he flicked a speck of dust from

his costume.
Malik shuffled over to them. 'My Lord Tegana, did a woman accompany

you to the cave?' Tegana shook his head. 'There's one in the outer chamber now,'
Malik said. Tegana crossed to the wall, removed two pieces of rock and peered
through the holes at Barbara who stood in the dusk looking at the cruel faces
with evil glowing eyes carved on the walls.

Involuntarily Barbara shivered and thought that following Tegana may not
have been a good idea after all, but she was intrigued by his disappearance.
Cautiously, she went deeper into the larger cave until she came to the
passageway. As she groped her way along it, water from a stalactite dripped onto
her face, so she took her handkerchief from her pocket and wiped it off. She came
to the end of the passageway. In front of her was solid rock. She turned around
and walked with a quickening pace back into the outer chamber. Suddenly, from
behind, a hand was clamped over her mouth and her handkerchief fluttered to
the ground.



7 Five Hundred Eyes

Ian was the first to realise that Barbara was missing. Susan and Ping-Cho
had gone up to their room where Ping-Cho took off her make-up and costume.
The Doctor was closeted in his room making final adjustments to the energy
distributor before installing it in the TARDIS while Marco was in the lounge
bringing his log-book of their journey up-to-date. Ian went to Barbara's room and
knocked on the door. When there was no reply he looked inside, then checked
with the girls and the Doctor. They all came downstairs and Ian went out to
the courtyard calling her name whilst the Doctor told Marco that Barbara was
missing.

'What do you mean - missing?' Marco looked up with a puzzled expression
on his face.

'Exactly that. Barbara's not here,' Ian said, coming in from the courtyard.
Marco stood up.

'What manner of country do you come fromwhere women wander off alone
at night?' he asked angrily as Tegana came in. 'Is Barbara with you?' Tegana
shook his head. 'The city's divided into distinct areas,' Marco continued, 'and the
three of us will go in search of her.'

'You'll not find her,' Tegana said, 'by now she will have been abducted.'
'I'm going to try,' Ian insisted and left.
'I'll help as well,' the Doctor said. Marco turned to him.
'No, Doctor, you stay here and both of you as well,' he said, pointing a

warning finger at Susan and Ping-Cho, and then strode out. Tegana shrugged and
followed him. Susan looked anxiously at the Doctor and he put his arm around
her.

'Barbara's an intelligent young woman who can look after herself,' he said,
whilst admitting that she must have had a reason for going out, and went back
up to his room wondering what it could have been. Shortly afterwards he came
downstairs, went to the courtyard, looked surreptitiously around, unlocked the
TARDIS and popped inside. He shut the door behind him and, using his pencil-
torch, refitted the energy distributor. Then he flicked on the power switch and
the lights lit up.

'Ha, ha,' he said jubilantly, 'stage one completed.' He slipped several
microswitches into one pocket and his miniaturised omni-electrometer into the
other. 'Just verify these circuits and then we're away!' He switched off the power
and went outside to be confronted by Susan and Ping-Cho. He locked the door
hastily.

'It's all right, grandfather,' Susan hissed, 'you can trust Ping-Cho.'
'Not much choice, have I?' the Doctor huffed as he clambered down off the

wagon.
'We think we know where Barbara is,' Susan added.
'Where?' The Doctor led them back into the way-station.
'Messer Marco was telling us about the Cave of Five Hundred Eyes, my

lord,' Ping-Cho began.



'And Barbara was fascinated, particularly about them glowing in the dark,'
Susan continued.

'But why would she go there without telling anyone?' the Doctor protested.
'Because the lady Barbara knew that Messer Marco would do all he could

to dissuade her,' Ping-Cho concluded. The Doctor grunted.
'Do you know where this cave is?'
Susan nodded. 'On the road to Su-Chow,' she said. The Doctor clapped his

hands.
'Chenchu,' he called, and the manager came from the kitchen, 'where is the

Cave of Four Hundred . . .?'
'Five Hundred Eyes, grandfather,' Susan interjected.
'On the road to Su-Chow, about a third of a league from here, my lord, set

back against the foothills.' The Doctor turned to Susan and Ping-Cho.
'You two wait here,' he said and started towards the courtyard.
'My lord goes there now?' Chenchu wailed. 'At this hour the spirits of the

Hashashins walk abroad.'
'Fiddlesticks,' the Doctor replied and went outside where he stopped and

looked back at them. 'The road to where?' he asked lamely.
'Oh, grandfather, you'll get lost, you know you will,' Susan said in

exasperation. The Doctor hesitated and then beckoned to them.
'Oh, very well, then, come along, both of you.'
'My lord, you'll not come back alive,' Chenchu cried out.
'It's the only way I shall come back,' the Doctor replied airily as they set off.
Before being taken into the inner chamber, Barbara was blindfolded,

gagged and her hands tied behind her back. All the Tartars left except one who,
as Tegana was leaving, ran his forefinger across his throat. Tegana nodded, went
out and the wall closed behind them. The Tartar tied Barbara's legs and took off
her blindfold. Squatting, she cowered back against the wall when she saw his
face. It was plump and jolly until he smiled, revealing blackened stubs of teeth
and his eyes almost disappearing behind their lids. Then it became horrific. He
took a knife from his belt and tested the edge of the blade on his thumb. He didn't
cut himself so, still smiling at Barbara, he began honing the blade on the wall.

The Doctor, Susan and Ping-Cho entered the cave and both of the girls
gasped when they saw the eyes. The Doctor went over to one of the faces and
shone his pencil-torch on it.

'Quite extraordinary and just as I thought. Quartz,' he observed. 'There are
veins of it running through the rock structure and these faces were carved very
cleverly so that at the eyes the quartz is exposed.'

'Grandfather, we're looking for Barbara,' Susan reminded him.
'So we are, my child,' the Doctor said and shone his torch around the cave.

'Then, let us investigate.'
They searched everywhere, found the passageway and went to the end of

it. 'A fool's errand, Susan, that's what you've brought me on,' the Doctor
remonstrated as they came out of the passageway, 'a fool's errand.' Ping-Cho saw
Barbara's handkerchief lying on the ground against the cave wall.

'My lord, look,' she said, holding it up. Susan grabbed it from her.
'It's Barbara's, grandfather, I know it is,' she exclaimed, 'she was here.

Barbara. Barbara.' Her voice echoed around the cave and into the inner chamber



where the Mongol stopped honing his knife land took out the two pieces of rock
to see into the main chamber.

'Barbara, Barbara, where are you?' they called in unison. The Doctor shook
his head.

'She must've left,' he said. 'We probably passed her in the dark.' He began
walking towards the entrance to the cave when Susan screamed.

'The eyes, grandfather, those eyes,' she cried pointing at the face, 'they
moved.' But by the time the Doctor reached the face and shone his torch on it,
where were only two quartz eyes staring at him. 'I swear it, grandfather, I promise
you,' Susan insisted, 'the eyes moved.'

'Reflection,' the Doctor said grumpily, adding that it was a wild goose chase
and, without doubt, Barbara was nestled in bed at the way-station and sound
asleep. Ping-Cho let out a small shriek.

'What now?' the Doctor asked testily as she pointed to the entrance of the
cave. Tegana, his face hidden in the darkness, stood there, legs astride and his
hands on his hips.

'What are you doing here?' he demanded.
'Looking for Miss Wright,' the Doctor replied firmly. 'I presume Chenchu

told you where we were.'
Tegana nodded and asked why they thought Barbara would be in the cave.

Susan held up the handkerchief.
'This is Barbara's,' she said, 'and we found it over there.'
'In the passageway,' Tegana replied, 'but you have not found her.'
'Not as yet,' the Doctor sounded sarcastic.
'Then let us leave this place. The cave is possessed by spirits,' Tegana

announced.
'My dear fellow, I am not afraid of ghosts. You maybe but I am not.' The

Doctor's sarcasm was even more pronounced. Then they heard Ian calling their
names and he came into the cave with Marco. Ian was carrying a lamp.

'I told you not to leave the way-station,' Marco said angrily.
'But we were right to come, Messer Marco,' Ping-Cho protested, 'the lady

Barbara was here.' Susan held up the handkerchief.
'But there's no other sign of her?' Ian asked.
'No,' Susan and Ping-Cho answered in unison.
'Bring the lamp, Ian, I know all the secrets of the Cave of Five Hundred

Eyes.' Marco led the way to the passageway. Tegana followed him closely,
drawing his sword as Marco reached up and twisted the stalactite. The wall
swung open to reveal the Mongol standing over Barbara with the knife at her
throat. When he saw Tegana, he hesitated and the War Lord rushed in and cut
him down before he could stab her.

When they reached the way-station Susan and Ping-Cho helped Barbara to
her room where Susan suggested that one of them should stay with her for the
night. Barbara smiled wanly, thanked them both, but said that she would be all
right. When they were gone she collapsed on the bed, her body racked with sobs
of terror and relief.

Marco, Ian and the Doctor thanked Tegana for quick, decisive action. Then
Marco announced that they would spend one more day at the way-station to let
everyone, especially Barbara, get over their adventure.



'Everytime I closemy eyes I see those eyes in the cave,' Ping-Chomurmured
as they lay in their beds.

'The ones you see don't move,' Susan replied.
'True,' Ping-Cho admitted.
'Do you want to know something?' Susan asked.
'Tell me,' Ping-Cho said sleepily. Susan propped herself up on one elbow.
'I think Tegana knew about the inner chamber. I think he knew Barbara was

in there and I think he killed that man not to save Barbara's life but to protect his
own. That's what I think.' Ping-Cho sat bolt upright.

'What!' she exclaimed.
'So beware of him for the rest of the journey,' Susan continued, 'because I

think he's an evil man.' Ping-Cho lay down again and they were silent for a while.
'You'll be leaving soon, won't you, Susan?' Ping-Cho murmured.
'I suppose so,' Susan replied.
'I shall miss you.'
'I shall miss you, too, Ping-Cho.' And they fell asleep.



8 Wall of Lies

The lies began at dawn. Marco had gone to the stables to check the horses
when Tegana came to feed his stallion. Marco greeted the War Lord and again
expressed his gratitude for Tegana's prompt action which saved Barbara's life.
Tegana filled the water-trough in front of his horse from a bucket.

'Perhaps I should have let him kill the woman and then we could have
dispatched the others as I wanted to do on the Plain of Pamir,' Tegana replied,
and reminded Marco that he had always claimed thev were evil spirits who had
brought only trouble to the caravan. Marco shook his head.

'No, you are wrong. They are travellers as we are, but of another nature
which I do not understand. Even so, I am responsible for their safety.' Tegana
snorted in disgust. 'No,' Marco protested, 'I took their caravan from them and it is
my duty to see them safely on their way home,' Tegana patted the stallion's rump.

'Do you think they hold you in such esteem?' he asked.
'The Doctor, no, though with good reason. The others, yes.'
'And which of them commands?'
'The Doctor.'
'And leaders are obeyed,' Tegana emphasised and suggested that, with

cunning, Susan had won Ping-Cho from Marco's side.
'She's a child, Tegana,' Marco said with a smile.
'Be warned. Only a fool defends his enemies,' Tegana retorted. As they

walked from the stables towards the main courtyard Tegana argued that the
Doctor and his followers would set them at one another's throats and, when the
caravan was divided, they would be destroyed one by one.

'They are harmless, Tegana,' Marco insisted as they entered the courtyard.
'Harmless,' Tegana echoed the word and pointed to the TARDIS, 'when they

possess a caravan that flies.'
'What power they have is locked inside and I hold the key.' Tegana stopped

Marco with his hand and leant closer to him.
'Last night, Marco, when you and I and the man, Ian, were scouring Tun-

Huang for the woman, Chenchu thought the old man was in his room but it was
not so,' Tegana hissed conspiratorially. 'He was out here with his caravan.' Marco
was taken aback. 'What exactly are you saying, Tegana?' 'Does a magician need
a key to open a door?' Then Tegana walked into the way-station leaving Marco
staring at the TARDIS.

They were eating breakfast when Barbara came downstairs. The men stood
up as she approached the table and Ian pulled out her chair.

'How do you feel, my dear?' The Doctor solicitously asked the question that
was on everyone's mind with the exception of Tegana who wondered what she
knew. Barbara smiled at the Doctor as she sat down.

'Still a bit shaky, Doctor,' she replied.
'You are most fortunate to be alive, and had it not been for Tegana. . .' Marco

left the rest of the sentence unspoken.



'Yes, I know, and I am grateful to the War Lord,' she said looking into
Tegana's dark, expressionless eyes. A servant came and took her order. Marco
stared fixedly at his plate.

'What possessed you to go to the cave?' he asked. 'You know my rule about
obtaining permission to leave here, particularly at night.' Barbara hesitated
before replying.

'I wanted to see it,' she lied, 'and I knew you wouldn't've let me go.'
'Certainly, not alone,' Marco replied.
'If you'd asked, I'd've gone with you,' Ian said. Marco looked directly at

Barbara.
'How did you find it?' Barbara was flustered for a moment and then said

that when Marco had first mentioned the cave he had indicated where it was.
Marco shook his head.

'No, I didn't,' he said flatly. Barbara put her elbow on the table and rested
her forehead in her hand as Ian repeated Marco's question.

'I followed someone.'
'Who just happened to be going there.' Marco's voice was full of disbelief.

'Now tell the truth.'
'I've told you, I followed someone.'
'Who?' Marco insisted. Barbara looked at them one by one and finally her

eyes rested on Tegana.
'The War Lord Tegana,' she spoke softly but everyone heard. Tegana leapt

to his feet.
'Me!' he cried fiercely. 'I have been to the cave but once and you were there

when I arrived.'
'That's not true,' Barbara protested, 'I followed you.' Tegana eyed her coldly

and reiterated that he had only been there once.
'Why would I lie?' Barbara reasoned. 'I was almost killed.' Tegana turned

to Marco.
'Mark well all I have told you, my friend,' he said and strode from the room

onto the courtyard.
The servant brought Barbara's breakfast and placed it in front of her. As she

smiled her thanks, Marco stood up, excused himself from the table saying he had
things to do and went upstairs to his room. For a moment there was silence which
was broken when Ian suggested that Barbara should start to eat. She looked
around the table.

'You believe me, don't you?' She sounded tentative.
'Of all the silly questions,' the Doctor replied with a smile. 'Eat.' Barbara

picked up her chopsticks as Susan leant confidentially across the table.
'I have a theory about the War Lord Tegana,' she murmured and then

explained it. TheDoctor glanced uncomfortably at Ping-Chowhich vexed Susan.
'Oh, grandfather, I'd trust Ping-Cho with my life.'

'So would I,' Barbara said and, agreeing with Susan's theory, took it one
stage further. 'He must've been in the second chamber when I was taken prisoner
and he obviously knew what would happen to me, yet he did nothing about it
until, as Susan's said, he had to for his own ends.'

'The trouble is, my dear, we have no proof,' the Doctor admitted, 'none
whatsoever.' Ian fiddled with the chopsticks on his plate.



'Frankly, Doctor, the sooner we take a powder the better,' he said.
'Have your glasses of water ready in a few days time,' the Doctor replied.

Ping-Cho looked at Susan with a puzzled expression and then, realising what Ian
had meant, lowered her eyes.

The day was spent preparing the caravan for the next leg of their journey.
Lan-Chow lay two hundred leagues to the south-west and their route would take
them across the foothills of the Nan Shan mountain range, through the old cities
of Su-Chow and Khan-Chow where the Great Wall of Cathay began. In all,
Marco calculated that they would be travelling for thirty to forty days before
reaching their destination which stood on the banks of the Hwang Ho, or Yellow
River.

'I am rearranging the accommodation for the journey,' Marco announced in
the evening and looked at Susan. 'You will share Barbara's quarters so that Ping-
Cho may be alone.' Both of them were shocked.

'Oh, why, Messer Marco?' Ping-Cho wailed. Marco cleared his throat.
'We are entering Cathay,' he said, 'and you are the Lady Ping-Cho from an

illustrious family in Samarkand, on your way to be wed at the Khan's court to one
of his most distinguished advisers. It must be seen by those we may encounter
whilst travelling that you are being treated according to your exalted station in
life.' Ping-Cho ran up the stairs to their room and Susan followed her. Barbara
raised her eyebrows at Marco.

'You can't mean that,' she said, half-smiling.
'I would not have said it if I had not meant it,' he replied.
'Stop being pompous. They enjoy each other's company so much.'
'A familiarity I should never have permitted.'
'I doubt you could have prevented it,' Ian added and the Doctor silently

agreed with Ian's earlier opinion that the sooner they were on their way the better.
Upstairs, Ping-Cho sat miserably on the edge of her bed while Susan tried

to comfort her, saying that it wouldn't be so difficult as they would share a horse
all day, venturing off into the foothills, eating their meals together, and Barbara
wouldn't say a word if she crept into Ping-Cho's compartment for a whispered
midnight conversation.

But that was not the way it turned out to be. When Ping-Cho came onto the
courtyard in the morning, a horse had been saddled for her and, with it, a Mongol
bearer to hold the reins and walk alongside. Susan was given another horse and
the Doctor sat in the lead wagon with the Mongol driver whilst Barbara and
Ian, on horseback, kept him company on either side. Marco and Tegana would
ride off into the foothills in search of pheasants, quails, hares and wild boars to
supplement their evening meals.

Though the atmosphere among them was tense, the progress was good and
on the ninth evening they pitched camp within sight of Su-Chow. During their
evening meal, the Doctor made several mental calculations. The way-station at
Su-Chow was no more than half a day's travel away which would give them
ample time to take a bath, have their clothes cleaned, and dine at leisure. When
all was quiet, he would slip into the TARDIS to refit the verified circuits of the
microswitches, then gather his team together and take leave of this vexacious
Venetian and his uncouth barbaric companion, although he did feel a brief pang
of remorse about separating Ping-Cho and Susan. After dinner he challenged



Marco to a game of chess and, to everyone's astonishment, allowed himself to
be beaten on the thirty-fifth move.

'Shah mat,' Marco cried in triumph. The Doctor studied the board.
'Why, so it is,' he said blithely and congratulated Marco on his decisive

victory. 'You'll grant me my revenge tomorrow evening at the way-station?' he
requested.

'Whenever you like, Doctor,' Marco replied, 'but we're not staying at Su-
Chow. Our next stop will be at Kan-Chow in ten days time. Shall we wait until
then?'

'As you please,' the Doctor mumbled, realising that their quick escape was
no longer possible and regretting he had thrown away an easy victory on the
thirtieth move.

Beyond Su-Chow they travelled across undulating prairies which stretched
away northwards and, to the south, the Nan Shan mountain range with its
snowcapped peaks still dominated the horizon. The weather was temperate, the
caravan maintained an average of five leagues a day and, as they journeyed on,
Marco relieved much of the tension by allowing Ping-Cho and Susan to spend
more time together. For his part, the Doctor contained his impatience as best he
could which did not go unobserved by Ian and Barbara who realised what should
have happened at Su-Chow.

On the fifth day they encountered a merchant caravan travelling in the
opposite direction. Courtesies were exchanged and questions put about the
possibility of other caravans along the route. The merchant, a bumptious,
overweight, middle-aged man from Kan-Chow, reported that since leaving Kan-
Chow he had only seen a group of Tartar horsemen riding towards the city. He
admitted that he was alarmed at their approach, believing them to be bandits
which, by their appearance, they could have been, their leader having a vivid
scar down one side of his face. But they rode on leaving the caravan in peace.
Tegana was intrigued to learn that Acomat must have overtaken them at night
and would be waiting for him in Kan-Chow.

Barbara was the first to see it on the eighth day of their journey. They were
travelling through a valley towards Kan-Chow when she saw in the distance a
grey line which snaked up and over the hills. She pointed to it excitedly.

'Look, Ian, it's the Great Wall of Chi - Cathay,' she corrected herself with
a glance at Marco.

'Good for a two thousand mile stroll along the top,' Ian replied.
'It was built three hundred years before the birth of Our Lord Jesus Christ,'

Marco added.
'And do you know why it was built?' Tegana demanded, punching himself

on the chest. 'To keep War Lords, Tartars like me out of Cathay.' He roared with
laughter. It occurred to the Doctor that, after all, Tegana had a vestige of humour
in him.

By noon on the tenth day they were installed in the way-station at Kan-
Chow under the shadow of the Great Wall and, after Ian had bathed and changed
his clothes, he knocked on the Doctor's door. He was invited in, sat down in a
chair and then the Doctor began juggling with the micros witches.

'Been like that since Su-Chow,' Ian remarked as the Doctor sent five of them
flying into the air to be deftly caught, one by one, in his mandarin's hat.



'By this time tomorrow, Chesterton, we shall be elsewhere,' the Doctor
prophesied. Ian thought about the prospect for a moment.

'I won't be sorry but there will be all those loose threads left dangling,' he
replied. 'What happens to Marco, Ping-Cho and Tegana?'

'My dear fellow, we know what happens to Polo. He almost reaches home
but gets captured by the Genoese and chucked in the clink which serves him
right after the way he's treated us.' The Doctor dusted his hands dismissively.
'Ping-Cho will no doubt marry her civil servant and as for Tegana, with all due
respect, I can only wish for the worst.' Ian volunteered to let Barbara and Susan
know that they were under starter's orders.

'Be careful what you say to Susan,' the Doctor cautioned, 'particularly if
Ping-Cho is around. That Chinese child makes me nervous.' Ian was surprised.

'Good Lord, Doctor, why?'
'She knows I have a duplicate key,' he replied and told Ian about the incident

on the courtyard at Tun-Huang. 'When I came out of the TARDIS the pair of
them were standing there,' he concluded. Ian smiled.

'Doctor, the least of our worries is Ping-Cho.'



9 Too Many Kan-Chow Cooks

Ian's conjecture about Ping-Cho was more accurate than the Doctor's
prophecy and the only person concerned about her was Susan as they sat in her
room. 'Will you be leaving tonight?' Ping-Cho asked. 'Possibly,' Susan replied.

'I want you to know that this journey has been the happiest time of my life,
in spite of all the dangers and Messer Marco's odd behaviour after Tun-Huang.'
'I keep wondering what Tegana said to him.' 'I've asked Messer Marco a hundred
times but he remains silent.' Ping-Cho looked earnestly at Susan, 'You will say
goodbye, won't you?' 'Of course.'

'No matter how late it is.'
'I promise. My room's just along the passageway and I must pass yours to go

downstairs.' Ping-Cho looked perplexed. Susan smiled and rapped on the bedside
table with her knuckles. 'I'll knock on the door.' Suddenly Ping-Cho's face lit up.

'He's a liar, Susan, he's a liar and we can prove it. Come on.' She grabbed
Susan by the hand and ran down the corridor to Marco's room, tapped cursorily
on the door and, without waiting for a reply, dragged Susan inside. Marco was
sitting at the table, writing up his journal.

'He's a liar and we've the proof, Messer Marco,' Ping-Cho blurted. Marco
put down his quill pen and looked at them with a smile.

'Who's a liar?' he asked. Ping-Cho glanced at Susan and swallowed.
'The War Lord Tegana.' Marco frowned.
'That's a serious charge, young lady,' he warned.
'But we have the proof, Messer Marco,' Ping-Cho insisted. Marco studied

the unfinished page of his journal for a moment.
'All right,' he said finally, folding his arms, 'tell me.'
'Do you remember the War Lord's reply when the Lady Barbara said she

had followed him to the Cave of Five Hundred Eyes?'
'Yes. He said he'd never been there before.'
'That was the lie, Messer Marco. When the War Lord came into the cave

Susan's grandfather showed him the Lady Barbara's handkerchief saying we had
found it over there, pointing to a dark corner and Tegana asked if we had explored
the passageway.'

'Well?' Marco asked.
'If he had never been in the cave before, how could he have known that the

corner was a passageway?'
'That's right, Ping-Cho, and grandfather will agree as well,' Susan was

emphatic but Marco shook his head.
'I won't put the question to the Doctor,' he said and explained that most

travellers knew about the cave but only a few, of whom he was one, knew about
the inner chamber. 'No, this is not proof that the War Lord Tegana is a liar.
Believe me, it will take much more than that to shake my confidence in him.' He
picked up his quill, dipped it in the ink and continued writing his journal.

At their dinner the Doctor was affable, almost jovial, Ian thought, as he
bantered with everyone around the table, rotating the dumb-waiter and selecting
a delicacy to place on Barbara's, Susan's or Ping-Cho's plate, observing that Kan-



Chow was renowned throughout Cathay for its cooking. Marco agreed but
expressed his surprise that the Doctor knew it.

'My dear Polo, I know a few facts about Cathay,' the Doctor replied
lightheartedly. 'For example, one should always have one's tailor in Han-Chow
where the finest silks are spun and woven, and it is considered bad form to die
other than at Lu-Chow where the best wood for coffins is to be found.' Everyone
laughed and Marco admitted that he knew both cities and the Doctor was right.

Afterwards they drank tea in the lounge while Marco spoke about the next
leg of their journey. Grinning at the Doctor, he conceded that Lan-Chow was not
as distinguished as Kan-Chow, Han-Chow or Lu-Chow but nonetheless it was
important as the first city on the banks of the Hwang Ho, or Yellow River, on its
thousand league course to the sea. Marco estimated it would take them a week
to reach Lan-Chow. 'No, for you to reach it,' the Doctor mentally corrected him
with a sly smile.

Tegana stood up, stretched, and announced he was going to take the night
air before sleeping. Neither Ping-Cho nor Susan believed him as he walked_out
nto the courtyard. Ian leant over to Barbara.

'Following him, are you?' he whispered.
'Not on my life,' she replied emphatically.
Susan and Ping-Cho then said they were going to their rooms and one by

one they bade the others goodnight. Susan left the Doctor to the last.
'Goodnight, grandfather,' she said and kissed him on the cheek.
'Sleep well, my child, and may your dreams transport you to wondrous

places,' he replied, with a hint of a wink.
When the girls reached Ping-Cho's door, she looked at Susan.
'And they will, won't they?' Susan nodded. Ping-Cho tapped gently on her

door. 'You won't forget?'
'No, I won't forget,' Susan replied and went to her room where her own

clothes, all crisp and clean, were hanging. She sighed, then changed into them
and sat on the edge of the bed to wait.

Tegana knew where to find Acomat because, before he started his journey
to the Khan's summer palace, meeting-places in every city had been arranged.
He told him that he knew they had passed the caravan one night which made
Acomat laugh.

'Between Tun-Huang and here we could have attacked you twenty times,'
he boasted, 'but you did not signal.'

'In open country there would have been no place to hide the bodies,' Tegana
replied. 'In the desert the winds and the singing sands would have concealed
them, as will the bamboo forests we shall soon approach along a tributary of the
Hwang Ho. They are dense, almost impenetrable, and we must pitch our tents
on the edge of one for a night before we reach Lan-Chow. Watch for us and I
shall signal to you like this.' He strode over to the fire burning in the hearth and
snatched a branch of wood from it which he waved above his head. 'Then with
stealth attack and we shall slaughter them, hiding their carcasses in the depths
of the forest. Take the flying caravan to the great Khan Noghai while I ride on
to Shang-Tu and fulfil my mission.'

'How does one enter this caravan, my lord?' Acomat asked.



'There is a keywhich Polo has but I shall retain it until I return to Karakorum
and proclaim the great Khan Noghai as Master of the World.'

In his room the Doctor changed into his own clothes, putting the omni-
electrometer into one pocket of his jacket and the microswitches into the other.
He waited until all was quiet before he peered cautiously along the corridor. No
one was in sight, all in their rooms, he thought. Swiftly and silently he went down
the stairs and out onto the courtyard.

For a moment he stood in front of the TARDIS and tapped his pocket which
contained the microswitches. Wondrous places, he thought with a smile, then
clambered onto the wagon, unlocked the door and went inside. But he had made
one miscalculation. They were not all in their rooms. The War Lord Tegana,
returning after taking the night air, was watching him from the entrance to the
way-station and as soon as the Doctor had closed the door behind him, Tegana
hurried to Marco's room. Without bothering to knock, he entered.

'The old magician is in the caravan,' he proclaimed to a startled Marco, 'I
saw him enter.' Marco shook the sleep from his head.

'Go back quickly and keep guard in case he comes out. If he does, hold
him there,' he replied. Tegana smiled and left the room as Marco threw on his
clothes, drew his sword and burst into Ian's room. Ian was reclining fully dressed
on the bed.

'Get up,' Marco ordered, 'fetch Miss Wright and the girl. Bring them to the
courtyard immediately.' Ian did his best to appear nonchalant, shrugging as if
he didn't know what was happening but inwardly realising that something had
gone very wrong. He did as he was told, collected Barbara and Susan and the
three of them went onto the courtyard where Tegana and Marco stood in front
of the wagon.

'What's all this about?' Ian bluffed. Marco pointed his sword at the ship.
'The Doctor, as you call him, is in there.' His voice was glacial.
'Have you checked his room,' Ian asked innocently.
'Do you take me for an idiot?' Marco replied. 'We'll wait here until he comes

out, even if we stay all night.'
Inside the TARDIS the Doctor spent a busy hour putting the microswitches

back in place and checking the circuits one by one with the exception of two: the
blue lamp on top which might draw attention, and the dematerialisation circuit in
case he couldn't get back. But everything would work, he knew it, as he rubbed
his hands together and went outside.

'Lock the door,' Ian shouted. The Doctor fumbled for the key in his pocket,
found it, did as he was instructed and turned defiantly to face Marco and Tegana.
Marco held out his hand.

'I'll take the key,' he said.
'No.' The Doctor was adamant. Tegana leapt onto the wagon and raised his

sword.
'You're an old man, Doctor,' Marco said, 'and I do not wish to use force.'

The Doctor glared at him.
'It's what you'll need to use, Polo.'
'Shall I cut it off?' Tegana asked, his sword poised above the Doctor's hand.
'Grandfather, give it to him, give it,' Susan screamed. The Doctor opened

his hand and held out the key.



'Did I not say he had another?' Tegana proclaimed as the Doctor clambered
down from the wagon and waved the key in front of Marco's face.

'Put that key in the lock and you'll destroy the caravan, Polo,' hewarned, 'and
then where will you and your precious Kublai Khan be?' Marco snatched the key
from the Doctor's hand. 'You need more than a key, Polo, you need knowledge,'
- the Doctor tapped the side of his head with his forefinger - 'knowledge you'll
never possess.'

'Give me that knowledge.'
'It's beyond your comprehension, Polo.'
'The Doctor's right, Marco,' Ian interjected.
'We're here, the four of us,' Barbara added, 'and the ship is repaired, so why

not let us leave you?'
'In peace,' the Doctor snapped. Susan thought about Ping-Cho and bit her

lower lip.
'No,' Marco retorted and turned to Tegana. 'Bear me witness. I wear the gold

seal of mighty Kublai Khan and by the authority it invests in me, I do hereby
seize and hold your flying caravan.' He pointed his sword at each of them in turn.
'Be warned, any resistance to this decree is instantly punishable by death. Now,
return to your rooms.' The Doctor looked at Marco and shook his head sadly.

'Oh, you poor, misguided, stupid, pathetic savage,' he said and walked back
into the way-station.



10 Bamboozled

The journey became a nightmare. In the morning they discovered that
Marco had segregated them, taken away their horses, therebymaking them travel
together in a wagon, and eat and sleep in a guarded separate tent. Ping-Cho was
not allowed to associate with any of them which made her resent Marco who,
as they travelled on, struggled to fight off his pangs of conscience. But the
arrangements suited Tegana perfectly. The caravan was divided which would
make his and Acomat's task much easier when they reached the bamboo forests
where he would despatch Marco whilst Acomat and the Tartars slaughtered the
others and Ping-Cho.

On the third day of the journey as they sat in the wagon Ian gave vent to
the sentiment the four of them felt.

'It's pointless continuing like this,' he said, 'wemust make a bid for freedom.'
The Doctor nodded.

'That's more easily said than done, Ian,' Barbara warned.
'I know the odds are against us,' he replied, 'but we must try.'
'Yes, Chesterton, I agree with you,' the Doctor added. 'My ship is sitting

there waiting for us.'
'But Marco has both keys,' Susan reminded them.
'We must recover one of them,' Ian said. 'But how?"
'Capture Polo,' the Doctor remarked.
'Why not?' Ian asked. 'Take him hostage.' Barbara shook her head.
'We're hopelessly outnumbered, Ian.' He smiled at her.
'During the day, yes. But not at night. Then there's only the guard.'
'Armed,' Susan observed. Ian raised his hand.
'It'll be up to me to change that.'
And Tegana?' Barbara asked.
'Since we've all been lumped in one tent, Marco sleeps in his own quarters

which has an outside flap, so the War Lord has the main section of their tent to
himself.' Ian grinned. 'I'll do my best not to disturb his slumbers.'

'Fullv aware that you are perfectly capable of this enterprise, Chesterton, I
have only one question to put to you,' the Doctor said. 'When?'

Ian glanced at them one by one. 'Tonight.'
The Doctor turned to Susan. 'I'm sorry, my dear, but I must insist, not one

murmur of this venture to Ping-Cho.' Susan shrugged.
'Marco has forbidden us to speak to one another, grandfather.'
It was late afternoon when the caravan stopped on the edge of a bamboo

forest. The tents were pitched and a campfire lit using wood the Mongol bearers
had collected during the day's travel as bamboo was unsuitable for a fire. Barbara
and Susan prepared a meal for the Doctor, Ian and themselves while Ping-Cho
cooked for Marco and Tegana. It was all so awkward and formal that Ping-Cho
and Susan didn't knowwhether to laugh or cry. But on one occasion whenMarco
wasn't watching them closely, Ping-Cho put her right hand in front of her chest
and discreetly waved her fingers up and down. Susan did the same and they both
understood.



Later, the Doctor, Susan, Barbara and Ian were sealed in their tent and the
armed guard posted in front of the flap.

'Shall we sing a song?' Ian asked, holding up a porcelain plate. 'A rousing,
noisy one.'

'How about Loch Lomond?' Barbara suggested.
'I know that one,' the Doctor said, remarking that it was a shame they didn't

have any bagpipes as an accompaniment. Taking Ian's cue, they burst into song,
falteringly at first but when they came to the chorus they were in unison and
full voice.

'Oh, ye'll tak' the high road and I'll tak' the low road.

And I'll be in Scotland afore ye,

But me and my true love will never meet again
On the bonnie, bonnie banks of Loch Looooomond.' As they roared out the last
word, Ian snapped the plate in two.

Marco stood with Ping-Cho outside the tent and shook his head in
bewilderment. In all his journeys he had never met such travellers and he knew
he was treating them badly. He liked them, he enjoyed their company but he
wanted to return to Venice and the gift of the flying caravan to the Khan was the
way to achieve it. He turned away and walked back to the main tent. Ping-Cho
stared at the flap and repeated her little wave with tears welling in her eyes.

After midnight Ian put his plan into operation. He slit open the back of the
tent with the edge of the broken plate and crawled out.

Still crouching, he looked around cautiously. The guard was facing the
bamboo forest and leaning with his back against a wagon. Ian crept towards him,
knowing he would be difficult to overpower silently as he had to attack from
the side which, unless he was very quick, would give the Mongol time to shout
an alarm. Ian reached the end of the wagon and steeled himself to spring out.
Then he stopped, looked around sharply and went back into cover. The guard
was dead with an arrow sticking out of his chest. Ian returned to the tent, undid
the flap and told them.

'Bandits, Chesterton,' the Doctor said. 'Inform Polo.' The three of them
understood the Doctor's implication.

'Yes, Doctor,' Ian replied and left the tent. Then he saw Tegana crouched
over the dying fire, putting sticks on it. Ian returned to the tent.

'Tegana's by the fire.'
'Try to by-pass him without being seen,' the Doctor said, 'Polo's the one to

be told.'
Tegana was pre-occupied with the fire so it was not difficult for Ian to skirt

around him and reach the open flap of Marco's quarters. He went inside and
shook Marco's shoulder.

'Marco, wake up,' he whispered urgently. Marco stirred. 'The guard's been
killed. I think we're in for an attack by bandits.' Marco scrambled to his feet,
grabbed his sword and went into the main section of the tent.

'Where's Tegana?'
'Outside, tending the fire. We thought it wiser to inform you first.' Marco

rushed out just as Tegana picked up a burning brand.



'Tegana,' he hissed, 'bandits.' Tegana threw the stick back onto the fire.
'Wake the bearers. Arm yourself. Ian, ask the Doctor to escort Susan and Barbara
to my tent and put them with Ping-Cho.' When Ian returned Marco handed him
a sword. 'Do you know how to use one?'

'Not the way you mean,' Ian replied with a smile, 'but given half a chance
I'll learn.' The Doctor came out of the main tent.

'What's the plan of battle, Polo?' he asked.
'We defend ourselves as best we can,' Marco said and handed the Doctor

a sword.
'We are bound to be outnumbered. What's needed here is strategy,' the

Doctor retorted.
'If you are as aggressive with a sword as you are with your tongue we cannot

lose,' Marco said. The Doctor shook his head.
'It's not enough.' The Doctor placed the tip of the blade on the ground and

rested his hands on the hilt. 'Definitely not enough. No, we must, we must. . .' -
a devious smile spread across his face - 'bamboozle them.'

'I don't understand,' Marco admitted.
'Perhaps a word unfamiliar to your ears, which means to outwit or to

deceive.' The Doctor looked at Ian. 'Chesterton, help me to hack down some of
those bamboos. You as well, Polo,' he ordered. 'And you. too,' he added, looking
at Tegana.

The four of them went to the edge of the forest and began slashing down
the bamboo stalks.

'What is this about, Doctor?' Marco asked.
'We are about to build a better bonfire,' the Doctor replied.
From the depths of the forest Acomat waited impatiently for Tegana's

signal. He could see the campfire burning but nothing else. He turned to the
Tartar at his side.

'What keeps him?' he growled.
'Perhaps the War Lord sleeps,' the Tartar replied.
'True. Tegana is not as young as we are. Alert the others. We shall wake

him up.'
The Doctor was heaping bamboo stalks onto the fire as Marco came over

to him with some more.
'Is Tegana right?' he asked, 'are you a magician?' The Doctor was amused.
'I would have thought you knew about bamboo, Polo. It has compartments

in it full of air and as they heat up the air expands until the stalk explodes. Not
unlike a Cathay fire-cracker,' he added for good measure. Then they heard the
shouts from within the forest as Acomat and the Tartars came noisily towards
the camp.

'Defend yourselves,' Marco shouted and they all faced the forest.
Tegana was inwardly fuming with rage. He had told Acomat to attack with

stealth and he had been disobeyed, his plan had failed. Now Acomat must pay
the price. The Tartars swarmed from the forest with Acomat at their head.

'So the Master of the World's War Lord, Tegana, is awake,' he cried just
before Tegana cut him down. Then, the bonfire began to explode as Marco, Ian
and the Doctor, shouting 'be off with you', and the bearers counter-attacked.
Acomat's followers took to their heels and fled back into the forest.



Barbara came to the entrance of the main tent. 'Are you all right?' she asked
anxiously.

'We set the knaves scuttering, my dear,' the Doctor replied, waving his
sword dramatically in the air.

'And the explosions?' Ian pointed to the fire and explained the Doctor's use
of the bamboo.

'The bandits thought there were devils in the fire,' Marco added.
'No, Polo, more than that. They ran because the War Lord slew their leader.

That's what broke them.' He glanced at the two bearers who were carrying away
Acomat's body. Tegana swaggered over to the Doctor.

'In battle all men face death,' he proclaimed. The Doctor looked at him
evenly.

'True, but few expect to meet it,' he replied. Tegana turned away and walked
past Barbara into the tent. Marco glanced from Ian to the Doctor.

'Were you attempting to escape?' he asked.
'No, Polo, we were escaping.' The Doctor nonchalantly stuck his sword into

the ground. Ian explained their plan and remarked that the Doctor had insisted
Marco be warned. Marco inclined his head to the Doctor.

'I thank you for our lives, Doctor,' he said half-smiling, 'but out of prudence
for the future, it would be preferable if the guard were on my tent rather than
yours.'

'We are no longer prisoners,' Ian stated.
'No.'
The Doctor held out his hand. 'Then give me the key and we shall journey

on.'
Marco sighed. 'I wish I could make you realise how important your flying

caravan is to me.' The Doctor bristled.
'Better you realised how infinitely more important it is to us,' he snapped

and stomped into their tent.



11 Rider from Shang-Tu

At sunrise they broke camp and travelled beyond the bamboo forests onto
the plain leading to Lan-Chow and the river. But at midday Marco halted the
caravan at a small inn near a village and announced that they would stay there
until the following morning to recover from the events of the previous night.
The inn was not as well-appointed as a way-station but it was adequate and the
food, though simple, was good. The landlord said he was honoured to have such
distinguished guests and did his best to make them comfortable. Marco had lifted
his strictures, Ping-Cho and Susan were sharing a room again, and the
atmosphere at the table was relaxed. When they had eaten and were sipping their
tea, Marco looked at each of them in turn.

'Will you, on your honour, promise not to attempt another escape?' he asked.
The question was received with a stubborn silence. Marco sighed and put his
hands, palms down, on the table. 'So be it,' he muttered.

'We sacrificed our bid for freedom to save you, Polo,' the Doctor retorted.
'I know you did,' Marco said, 'and in return I revoke, by official decree, the

seizure of your flying caravan.'
'Noble of you, I'm sure,' the Doctor replied tartly, 'now hand over the keys.'

Marco shook his head.
'No, Doctor, we've been through this before.'
Tegana pointed a warning finger at Marco. 'Whatever you grant them, they

will use against you.'
Marco chuckled. 'I shall be guarded day and night.'
Tegana stood up. 'Let me be your sword. I shall protect - '
'No.' Marco cut him off sharply. 'You are in my charge, not I in yours.' They

were two remarks that intrigued the Doctor and to which he referred later when
the four of them were alone.

'Tegana realises that the jig is up as far as we're concerned.'
'He knows we're on to him,' Ian agreed.
'But on to what?' Barbara asked. The Doctor leant forward in his chair.
'That, young woman, is the pertinent question. Ian saw the War Lord

tending the campfire last night. A menial task, one he'd order the guard to do.'
'But the guard was dead, grandfather,' Susan said.
'Precisely, dear child,' the Doctor replied, 'and Tegana sounded no alarm.

Ergo, he knew.'
'You're suggesting he was implicated in the attack,' Ian observed.
'I'm stating a fact, Chesterton,' the Doctor replied. 'Since we became

involved with Polo's caravan, two men have died and Tegana slew them both.
He knew them both, I've no doubt, the one in the forest called him by name, but
his ultimate mission is more important than their lives.'

'But what is it?' Barbara asked.
'Nice lady, that I do not know and, what is more, I do not care. I want that

key and us away from here.'
Suddenly, they heard the sound of jingling bells approaching.



'It's not Christmas, is it?' Susan joked and then a young man with a bandeau
around his head and wearing close-fitting breeches tucked into his riding boots,
and a shirt with a wide belt ringed with bells tightened around his waist, strode
in from the courtyard.

'I seek Messer Marco Polo,' he said. Susan stood up.
'He's in his room, I'll fetch him.' She ran up the stairs. Ian was staring at

the bells.
'Why do you wear those?' he asked finally.
'To let people know that I approach,' the young man replied with a smile

and explained that he was a special courier to Kublai Khan. 'I ride without respite
to my destination, apart from the moment to change my horse every league. The
bells warn the innkeeper to saddle up a fresh steed for me.'

Where have you come from?' the Doctor asked.
'The summer palace at Shang-Tu.'
'That's a hundred leagues from here,' Ian exclaimed. 'When did you leave?'
'Yesterday.'
'I would have thought it physically impossible,' Barbara said.
'My clothing, as you see, is very tight, my lady, or else we would be shaken

to pieces.'
'Are there many like you who can cover such distances without rest?' Ian

asked. The young man waved a hand in front of his face.
'We are few, my lord, but it's in our blood. All of us come from the great

steppes to the north.'
The Doctor suggested that as he had reached his destination he should sit

down. The young man smiled. 'Thank you, my lord,' he replied, eased out his
belt, sat in a chair and stretched his legs.

Susan was about to rap onMarco's door when she thought it would be better
if Ping-Cho told him of the young man's arrival, so she went to their room and
asked her to do the errand. Ping-Cho guessed instantly where the courier had
come from, rushed over to Marco's room, knocked briefly on the door and,
without waiting for a reply, went inside. Marco was at the table putting the two
keys in a compartment at the back of his journal. He looked angrily at Ping-
Cho who apologised for bursting in and explained that one of the Khan's special
couriers was downstairs. Marco closed his journal and looked at her.

'Do I have your word not to tell anyone where the keys are?'
'Yes, Messer Marco, you do. No one at all.'
Followed by Ping-Cho and Susan, Marco went downstairs and the young

manjumped to his feet, then bowed.
'Ling-Tau,' Marco said with pleasure and asked him what was the great

Khan's bidding. Ling-Tau opened the despatch pouch that was part of his belt
and handed Marco a sealed parchment document which he opened and read. He
looked around at the others.

'Kublai Khan wishes to see me without delay,' he said, tapping the
parchment.

'Give me the keys, one will do, jump on your horse and gallop away,' the
Doctor replied. Even Marco could not resist a grin.



'No, Doctor, Lan-Chow is a day's travel from here. We shall go there
tomorrow, take horses and ride to the summer palace at Shang-Tu. All in all,
eight days to cover the distance,' he concluded.

'What about my personal effects?' the Doctor glowered at him.
'They will follow on with a commercial caravan,' Marco replied. 'There is

at least one every day that leaves Lan-Chow for Shang-Tu.'
'Polo, we are talking about my ship,' the Doctor snapped back, 'and I'm not

letting it out of my sight.' Marco held up the Khan's seal.
'This says your flying caravan will arrive without incident at the summer

palace. On Kublai Khan's oath.' The Doctor snorted as Marco turned to Ling-
Tau.

'I shall prepare a reply for the great Khan which you will carry to him
tomorrow when we leave here.' Ling-Tau pulled off his bandeau and undid his
belt.

'Thank you, Messer Marco,' he said with a smile. Ian looked at him in
astonishment.

'Do you mean you'd have ridden back to Shang-Tu immediately?'
'If it were necessary, my lord,' Ling-Tau replied, pushing his shoulders back

and stretching. Ping-Cho thought he was a very handsome young man.
The next morning Ling-Tau galloped away with Marco's reply in his belt of

jingling bells while the caravan trundled sedately towards Lan-Chow. At noon
they could see the spires of the city and by mid-afternoon, the river shimmering
in the sunlight and snaking away to the horizon. Just before dusk they arrived at
the way-station where they were greeted by the rotund and pompous manager,
Wang-Lo. As usual, the Doctor had the TARDIS placed in the central courtyard,
this time

beneath a trelliswork of hanging gardens, before going up to his room to
take a bath and change. When he came downstairs to join the others for dinner,
the central courtyard contained only the hanging gardens.

'Where's my ship, Polo? What have you done with it?' he demanded. Marco
looked perplexed.

'I haven't touched it, Doctor. Honestly.'
'To what does the old lord refer?' Wang-Lo asked haughtily.
'His caravan,' Marco replied, 'it was out there.' He pointed to the courtyard.

Wang-Lo put the back of his right hand to his forehead.
'Oh, that's what it is. One had it removed to the stables.'
'The stables!' The Doctor exploded.
'One could hardly leave it under the hanging gardens, now could one?'
'Oh, yes, one could.' The Doctor was acerbic. 'What does one imagine it is,

a bathing hut?' Marco reminded him about the caravan being taken to Shang-Tu
with a commercial convoy.

'So you will need to accustom yourself to not seeing it for a while,' he said.
The Doctor seethed inwardly as Marco turned to Wang-Lo and asked him

when the next convoy left for Shang-Tu.
'One departs tomorrow in the morning,' Wang-Lo replied.
'Does one?' the Doctor replied, still smarting.
'One knows one does, my lord.' Wang-Lo sounded authoritative. The

Doctor stormed out as Ping-Cho had an idea and went to the hanging gardens



to think it over. There was a fountain and a pool in the centre with lotus leaves
floating on the surface under which goldfish ducked in and out. She sat on the
edge of the pool watching them when Susan came over to her. Ping-Cho looked
up, smiled and pointed to one of the fish. 'That one isWang-Lo,' she said, 'fat and
pompous.' 'There's Marco,' Susan observed, pointing to another, 'a little solemn
and look, that one has Ian's energy,' as one swam rapidly by.

'Barbara's independence.' Ping-Cho pointed at one which was on its own.
Another sped from under a lotus leaf to disappear under another. 'You,' Ping-Cho
giggled. 'There's grandfather,' said Susan, pointing to an elderly goldfish with
pride of place under the biggest lotus leaf. 'Now, where are you?' Susan asked,
and then spotted a frilled goldfish. 'There you are with the wedding veil,' she
exclaimed, and instantly regretted it. 'Forgive me, Ping-Cho, I'm sorry.' Ping-
Cho touched her hand.

'I miss Samarkand,' she confessed, 'I miss my home.' Susan sat beside her.
'Tell me about it.' 'It's a welcoming house that wants people to live in it. There
is a garden, rather like this one but not as elaborate but still very beautiful, and
in the summer evenings the air is filled with a thousand scents as well as the
soft, tiny sounds of humming birds' wings. I used to watch them for hours as
they hovered in front of the flowers drawing off the nectar.' Ping-Cho looked
back into the water. 'I would like to be there now.' 'I can understand. You make
it sound lovely.' 'And your home, Susan, is it so very far away?' 'As far as a night
star.' 'But you can reach it from Venice?' 'Not without the TARDIS.'

'So, if Messer Marco gives your caravan to Kublai Khan, you will never
see your home again.'

'Never.'
Ping-Cho put one hand to her lips. 'I gave him my word, Susan, I promised

not to tell anyone where he hid the keys.'
'And I promise no one will ask you,' Susan replied with a smile.
Ping-Cho complained of feeling faint whilst they were at table and excused

herself. Susan offered to help her to their room but Ping-Cho declined and
insisted that Susan finish hermeal. As soon as shewas upstairs, Ping-Cho slipped
into Marco's room, opened his journal which was lying on the table and stole
one of the keys from the compartment in the back. Then she went to their room,
lay down on her bed and waited for Susan who came as soon as she had eaten.
Ping-Cho sat up.

'How do you feel?' Susan sounded anxious.
'Fine. What did you have as the main dish?'
'Chicken-fat braised carp. It was delicious and I'm sorry you missed it.'
'So am I,' Ping-Cho pouted, 'but I had something to do and I have this to

give you.' She held out the key and Susan's eyes widened in surprise.
'But you promised Marco.'
'Not to tell anyone where they were. I've kept my word. You don't know

where this came from.' Susan sat on the edge of the bed beside her.
'Marco will be very angry,' Susan warned. Ping-Cho smiled at her.
'But one of us, at least, will be on her way home,' she said wistfully and

they hugged each other.



12 Runaway

After he had drunk his tea Marco went into Lan-Chow to make final
arrangements for the caravan's journey to Shang-Tu. At the same time Tegana
went to the stables to make travel arrangements for the TARDIS with a shifty-
eyed thin man named Kuiju who looked at it suspiciously.

'What is it, my lord?' he asked warily.
'AW'ar Lord's tomb which I want,' Tegana replied. "Can you have it taken?'

Kuiju bared his opium-stained teeth in a smile.
'Are you prepared to pay a good price?'
'How much?'
'I want gold, not Kublai Khan's paper money.'
'You'll have it.'
'In advance.' Kuiju rubbed his hands together.
'Half of it, the rest when I collect the tomb. How much?'
'One hundred golden pieces.'
'So be it.'
Kuiju could hardly believe his good fortune. 'When do I receive the first

half, my lord?'
'Tonight. For this must start its journey tomorrow. I shall give you

instructions when we meet again.'
'The street of the beggars at midnight,' Kuiju suggested.
'I shall be there.'
'As I shall, my lord,' Kuiju said and scurried off into the night. Tegana

looked at the flying caravan and stroked his chin.
'A War Lord's tomb,' he mused, 'more than that. A Khan's throne for

Noghai.'
The Doctor's wrath about his ship had been temporarily assuaged by the

quality of the eveningmeal andwhen Susan knocked lightly on his door he called
out gaily for whoever it was to enter. Ping-Cho was with her and closed the door
behind them.

'You are recovered, young lady,' he observed, 'that pleases me. How may
I be of service to you both?'

'It's Ping-Cho who has been of service to us. grandfather,' Susan replied.
'Look.' Ping-Cho opened her left hand and in the palm lay the key.

'I shall not ask questions, sweet person, rather shall I express my everlasting
gratitude.' The Doctor took the key from her and put it in the pocket of his jacket
which, having been cleaned, hung on the wall. 'We shall wait until all is quiet
before we take our leave,' he said and, smiling at Ping-Cho, added that he would
entrust them to notify Barbara and Ian. When they had left, the Doctor decided
to allow himself the luxury of another small glass of the mellow white wine they
had enjoyed with their meal. Shao Chiu was its name, he recalled, as he went
downstairs, sat in the lounge and ordered one. He was rolling some
appreciatively around his mouth and reflecting on their adventures of the past
weeks when Marco came in. The Doctor swallowed the wine.

'Join me in a glass, Polo?' he asked.



'Thank you, Doctor.' Marco pulled up a chair as the Doctor clicked his
fingers for service and ordered the wine.

'The arrangements are satisfactorily made for the rest of the journey to
Shang-Tu, Doctor,' Marco said.

'Knowing you, Polo, I do not doubt it.'
'Horses will be here for us at dawn and the bearers will see our wagons

safely charged before returning to Su-Chow. We'll ride until midday, stop at a
wayside inn for a meal and ride on until dusk.'

'No jingling bells, I trust.' Marco laughed.
'We won't be riding as hard as Ling-Tau.'
'An agreeable young man,' the Doctor observed and Marco reiterated that

their journey would take them eight days. 'There'll be a few aches and pains at
the end of that,' the Doctor added lightly, thinking all the time that they'd be long
since gone into another age and another galaxy whenMarco reached the summer
palace. Marco drained his glass and stood up.

'I must write up my journal, Doctor, so I'll bid you goodnight.'
'Useful thing, keeping a record of events, Polo. Goodnight.' As Marco went

up to his room, the Doctor took some more wine and began rolling it around
his mouth.

They put their plan into operation after midnight when the way-station staff
were asleep. They tip-toed out onto the courtyard and around to the stables. Ping-
Cho was with them to wave goodbye, as she put it. The Doctor was vexed that
there wasn't a guard on his ship.

'Anyone could steal it,' he said indignantly.
'Like us,' Ian murmured with a grin. The Doctor clambered up onto the

wagon. Ping-Cho ran over to him and kissed the back of his hand.
'Goodbye, kind lord,' she whispered.
'Farewell, gentle maiden,' the Doctor replied, 'and refuse to marry someone

old enough to be my grandfather.' Ping-Cho went to Barbara and Ian in turn to
say goodbye, leaving Susan until the last. They embraced with tears in their eyes
as the Doctor put the key into the lock.

'For a moment I thought you were going with them. Ping-Cho,' Marco's
voice came out of the darkness. 'No, Doctor, if you look into the gloom you will
see that you are completely surrounded by my bearers, all of whom are armed
as I am, and as Susan is not yet up there with you, it would be pointless trying
to dash for freedom. So come down, please, and give me the key.' The Doctor
withdrew the key from the lock and Barbara and Ian helped him to the ground.
He handed Marco the key without a word.

'Yes, Doctor, you're right, it is a useful thing." Marco said enigmatically as
the Doctor walked back into the way-station.

At dawn the Doctor stood in front of the TARDIS looking up at it, when
Marco and Tegana came over to him.

'Your horse is saddled, Doctor, and wemust start our journey,' Marco spoke
gently. The Doctor's eyes were cold when he turned to face him.

'Do I have your word as, I suppose, a gentleman, that my flying caravan, as
you call it, will safely reach the Khan's summer palace?'



'On my oath,' Marco replied, which Tegana thought was a huge joke
knowing that Kuiju would come to collect it once they had ridden from Lan-
Chow.

The wagon in the stable, my lord, I am here to take it,' Kuiju handed Wang-
Lo an official-looking document with wax seals and pointed to the relevant
clauses.

'One can read, fellow,' Wang-Lo retorted, although secretly he was
impressed by the seals. 'Take it.' Turning his back he went into the way-station.

During their midday meal at an inn, Marco broached the subject of the key.
'How did you come by it?' he asked the Doctor.
'It was given to me,' the Doctor replied, looking at him directly.
'By whom?' Ping-Cho opened her mouth to speak but Ian was quicker.
'Me. I searched your roomwhen youwere in Lan-Chow last night and found

it.' Dismissing the subject, Ian turned to Barbara and asked her to pass him the
red sauce.

'You mean the Hoy Sien Jeung,' Barbara smiled as she handed it to him.
Marco said nothing.

They rode on for two days without incident except that Susan noticed Ping-
Cho becoming more and more taciturn. She recognised the symptom of
homesickness. For his part, the Doctor spent his time dreaming of the hot bath
he would wallow in to ease his saddle-weary bones when they stopped in the
evening. Barbara and Ian enjoyed the countryside and themeandering river while
Tegana looked with cynical amusement at the Great Wall which he estimated
must have taken at least two centuries to build. Marco would have preferred
to force the pace but out of respect for the Doctor contented himself with their
progress. However, two crises were building. The first was triggered by Barbara
after dinner in a way-station when she insisted that Ian talk to Marco about
returning the TARDIS to them.

'It's pointless,' he said. 'I've tried again and again." Just then Marco came
into the lounge.

'Ian wants to talk to you,' she said and, adding that she was tired, went up
to her room. Marco looked at Ian who remained silent.

'What is it?' he asked. Ian thought for a moment before replying with
measured words.

'You must give us back the Doctor's flying caravan.' Marco turned away in
exasperation.

'You know what it means to me. If I give it to Kublai Khan, he will let me
go home to Venice.'

'We want to go home, too. And without it, we can't.'
'I have promised to take you to Venice with me and see you safely on your

way home from there.'
'By boat. But we can't go by boat. We need the Doctor's caravan.' Marco

looked at Ian for several seconds.
'Why, Ian?' he asked. 'Why?' Ian closed his eyes and when he opened them

he knew he would tell the truth.
'My home is in England, Marco,' he said.
'You've said so before and I grant it's a long way. But the journey is not

impossible. The Crusaders did it.' Ian took a deep breath.



'Marco, for me the Crusaders lived nearly seven hundred years ago.' For a
moment, Marco looked puzzled and then shook his head.

'That's ridiculous, Ian. The Crusaders were in Accra less than twenty five
years ago.' Ian looked at him in desperation.

'Don't you understand? We come from another time.'
'That's impossible.'
'The Doctor's caravan doesn't only cover distances. It crosses years,

centuries.'
'Journeys into the past and into the future,' Marco said, smiling.
'Yes. I know it's hard to believe but it's true. I swear it. Look at our clothes,

listen to the way we talk. Everything's different.'
'I have never been to England but I have heard that the English are an

eccentric race.' Marco took the gold chain with the Khan's seal from under his
blouse. On it hung the two keys, one of which he held between his forefinger
and thumb.

'Where did you find this?' he asked.
'In your room,' Ian replied.
'Whereabouts? Where had I hidden them? You must remember where you

found one.' Marco circled Ian slowly. 'But you didn't find it, did you? It was given
to one of you and you, Ian, lied to protect someone else, Ping-Cho obviously.'
Ian remained silent as Marco held up the key. 'It does not matter to me why you
lied. What is important is the fact that you are capable of lying.'

'So you don't believe me when I say we come from another time.' Marco
shrugged and put the chain back inside his blouse.

'If I did, Ian, I would give you the key,' he said andwent upstairs to his room.
The second crisis took place in the early hours of the morning when Susan

was asleep. Ping-Cho slipped out of bed, dressed and tip-toed to the door.
'Goodbye, Susan,' she whispered and went down td the stables where she

saddled up her horse and rode back towards Lan-Chow and, far beyond it,
Samarkand.

Susan raised the alarm when she woke up and saw Ping-Cho's empty bed.
She ran to Marco's door and knocked.

'Who is it?' Marco called.
'It's me, Susan, Messer Marco. Ping-Cho's gone." The door opened and

Marco, fully dressed, stood there.
'Gone? Gone where, Susan?' Susan swallowed before she replied.
'Home, I think. To Samarkand.'
'But that's more than three hundred leagues away. She'll never reach it.'

Marco hurried to the stables to confirm that Ping-Cho's horse was not there.
Susan woke Barbara and Ian.

'Is it because of the key?' Ian asked. Susan shook her head.
'She's homesick and she's taken grandfather's advice.'
'About marrying,' Barbara said. 'I don't blame her but it's a dangerous thing

to have done.'
When they were all downstairs, Marco said that as he was responsible for

her safety, he would ride back to find her and told them to stay at the way-station
until he returned. Tegana remarked that his mission to Kublai Khan was more
important than the impetuous act of a young girl and reminded Marco that the



Khan had sent Ling-Tau expressly to command him to reach the summer palace
without delay. Marco was in a quandary which Ian offered to resolve.

'You ride on to Shang-Tu,' he said, 'and I'll ride back, find Ping-Cho and
bring her to the summer palace.'

'Good thinking, Chesterton. En route you can verify that my ship is safely
on its way,' the Doctor remarked. To Karakorum, Tegana thought. Marco
considered the proposition. It was viable. He turned to Ian.

'When can you leave?'
'Now.' And as they rode on, Ian rode back.



13 to Karakorum

To Ian's surprise, it took three days hard riding to catch up with Ping-Cho.
She was at the small inn beyond Lan-Chowwhere they had rested after the attack
in the bamboo forest. Ping-Cho burst into tears when she saw him, tears of
dismay but, at the same time, tears of relief.

'You've come to take me back, haven't you?' she said, drying her eyes.
'I promisedMarco I would see you safely to the summer palace,' Ian replied,

'and I must keep my word.'
'I can't marry an old man I've never met. I won't. Ian.'
'I'm sure the Khan will understand and excuse you from the marriage.' Ian

had his fingers crossed mentally and then changed the subject. 'Did you see the
Doctor's caravan when you were riding here?' Ping-Cho shook her head.

'I hadn't thought about it, but now that you mention it, no, I didn't.'
'Neither did I. Perhaps the convoy follows a different route.' He shrugged.

'On our way back we'll stop at Lan-Chow and ask Wang-Lo.'
Whilst they were eating their evening meal under the watchful eyes and

eavesdropping ears of the innkeeper, Ian spoke of Ping-Cho's attempt to escape.
'How did you expect to reach Samarkand?' he asked.
'I knew I was bound to meet up with a caravan and I have enough gold to

pay my way.' Ian reminded her that they hadn't met many going in the opposite
direction between Lop and Lan-Chow.

'It is true, my lord, one must wait until there are enough wagons to justify
a caravan,' the innkeeper volunteered, 'and the lady would need to wait until
another moon because a convoy passed through the village yesterday. The old
lord's caravan was part of it.' Ian nearly choked on his food.

'The old lord who was here with us?'
'Yes.'
'His blue caravan?'
'Yes.'
'Going north?'
'Yes.'
Ian looked at Ping-Cho. 'It's too late to do anything tonight but we're not

riding for Shang-Tu in the morning. You wait for me here whilst I retrieve the
Doctor's flying caravan. Promise me you won't make another dash.'

'I promise, Ian,' Ping-Cho said with a little smile.
Marco was going to bed when he heard the jingling bells and instinctively

knew that Ling-Tau had come once again from the summer palace. He threw on
his robe and went downstairs where Ling-Tau smiled a greeting and bowed.

'What is it this time, Ling-Tau?' Marco asked.
Ling-Tau took the sealed parchment from the despatch pocket of his belt.
'Not for you, Messer Marco, this is for the War Lord Tegana.'
'I'll fetch him.' Marco climbed the stairs, rapped on Tegana's door and told

him the Khan's courier had a message for him. Tegana came downstairs, tore
open the document, read it and turned, stone-faced, to Marco.



'Kublai Khan will not receive me at the summer palace. I am to proceed
to Peking.'

'An escort worthy of your rank will arrive tomorrow, my lord,' Ling-Tau
reported. Without comment, Tegana went back to his room.

'What's this about?' Marco asked.
'I do not know. But you and the Lady Ping-Cho are expected at Shang-Tu.'

Marco explained that Ping-Cho had run away and Ian had gone to fetch her back.
Ling-Tau eased his belt and took off his bandeau.

'I shall go and find them in the morning,' he said, 'and in Lan-Chow arrange
their escort to Shang-Tu."

'Thank you, Ling-Tau.'
'It will be my pleasure to see the Lady Ping-Cho again,' he said with a grin.
At dawn Ian rode north and caught up with the convoy beyond the bamboo

forests. The TARDIS was no longer with it but the leader told him that Kuiju had
left them about two leagues back and taken the wagon along the old Karakorum
road. Ian galloped back to the intersection and turned along the abandoned track
riding as quickly as he dared. By mid-afternoon he had Kuiju and the wagon in
sight about a third of a league ahead of him. But there was a problem. Kuiju had
two companions with him. As Ian stalked them, he tried to resolve the situation,
but one against three, even with the element of surprise, seemed long odds. At
dusk he heard the bells and, tethering his horse, ran to the centre of the track
waving his arms. Ling-Tau reined in.

'Where is it?' he asked, jumping to the ground with his bells jingling.
'Down the road. They've bivouaced for the night.'
'They? How many?'
'Three.'
'We'll surprise them.'
'And risk a counter-attack in the dark? No, Ling-Tau, let's wait until dawn

and take them out whilst they're eating. But, please, don't wear your belt.' Ling-
Tau laughed and took it off, explaining that he had seen Ping-Cho at the village
inn, caught up with the convoy and been told where Ian had gone.

'Tell me about Karakorum,' Ian said.
'It used to be the capital of the Mongol empire,' Ling-Tau replied, 'but when

the Khan built his palace in Peking, it was abandoned.'
'It's a deserted city?'
'No, a dispersed one. Karakorum wasn't built of stone. It was a vast

collection of tents and encampments and when the Khan moved to Peking the
Mongols folded their tents and left.'

'You mean there is nothing there?'
'Nothing.'
'Then why is someone taking the Doctor's caravan to Karakorum?'
Ling-Tau grinned. 'We'll pose that question at dawn,' he said.
As the sky began to lighten, Ling-Tau drew his sword from the scabbard

attached to his saddle and he and Ian skirted along the edge of the track using
the scrub for cover.

'Two of us with one sword,' Ling-Tau observed, 'three of them with, no
doubt, three. An advantage of two.'



'Matched by stealth, speed and the fact that we know they're there but they
don't know that we're here,' Ian replied with a grin.

As they approached the wagon they could see Kuiju and his two
companions squatting on the ground eating with their fingers from a bowl of cold
rice and meat. Ian and Ling-Tau exchanged a glance, nodded and struck.

Ian kicked one of them in the solar plexus and left him gasping on the
ground. He disarmed him as the second one jumped to his feet and fled into the
woods. Kuiju made the mistake of trying to draw his sword but stopped abruptly
when the tip of Ling-Tau's pricked his neck.

'Where were you taking this?' Ian asked.
'To Karakorum, my lord.' Kuiju's voice quavered.
'But Karakorum doesn't exist anymore,' Ling-Tau said.
'No, my lord, yes, my lord,' Kuiju stammered.
'Why were you taking it there?' Ian asked. Kuiju remained silent until the

sword tip nicked him.
'At the War Lord Tegana's bidding. He said it was a tomb he wanted.'
'A tomb? Is that how he described it?'
'Yes, my lord.'
'It's one he will never be buried in,' Ian replied and pointed to the Tartar on

the ground. 'Help your friend here and join your companion in the forest.'
'Gladly, my lord,' Kuiju whined and closed his eyes with relief when Ling-

Tau lowered the sword. Yet in the back of his mind, Kuiju thought that, at least,
he had made fifty golden pieces.

Ian and Ling-Tau took the wagon back to the village inn where Ping-Cho
was waiting for them. Ling-Tau put on his belt and his bandeau and told them to
stay at the inn until the escort he would send from Lan-Chow arrived to conduct
them to the summer palace. Then he bowed to Ian, smiled at Ping-Cho, jumped
on his horse and galloped off.

'He's a fine young man,' Ian said as they watched him ride away.
'Yes,' Ping-Cho replied demurely, and blushed.
The escort of six warriors arrived in the middle of the next morning and

they set off immediately for the way-station at Lan-Chow. It was dark when
they arrived and Wang-Lo insisted that the wagon be placed under the hanging
gardens where, as he observed, one could keep one's eyes on it. Ling-Tau had
arranged that the wagon join a commercial convoy on the following day but Ian
was dubious about letting it out of his sight.

'One assures you, my lord, that one will not permit a repetition of such an
unfortunate occurrence,' Wang-Lo said with a dramatic gesture. 'One knows the
leader of the convoy who will come personally to take charge of the wagon.'

As they ate a late-night supper, Ping-Cho asked Ian if he really believed
Kublai Khan would let her out of the marriage contract.

'If it were to be seen that your affections lay elsewhere,' he said, studying his
chopsticks before pointing them at her. 'I'll tell you something else. The Doctor's
on your side and I've never seen him ultimately outwitted yet. He gets his way.'

In the morning the leader of the convoy, with four warriors, collected the
wagon under Ian's watchful eye and a new escort arrived to take them to the
summer palace. All along the route they were to discover that their meals and
accommodation had been arranged and at each way-station the manager made a



point of remarking that it had been the trusted Captain of mighty Kublai Khan,
Ling-Tau, who had dealt personally with the matter. Ian noticed that Ping-Cho's
blushes became more frequent.



14 Mighty Kublai Khan

Every bone in the Doctor's body ached and each evening in a different way-
station he soaked himself in a hot bath knowing he was fighting a losing battle.
Nonetheless, he prided himself on his courage and his resilience, with not a
murmur of complaint as they trotted across the fertile country beside the river.
On the sixth night they stayed at the way-station in Cheng-Ting which was also
known as the White City because the colour of the buildings could be seen
shimmering from afar in the sunlight. At noon on the seventh day they came to a
red lacquered wooden archway with a double filigreed golden gateway attended
by two guards in resplendent uniforms. On one side of the archway was the river
and on the other side a vast forest stretched off into the distance. The guards
opened the gates to let the party through the archway.

'We are entering the grounds of the summer palace,' Marco said as the
Doctor thought it would have been easier to ride around the archway than go
through it. In front of them a wide well-kept grass path curved into the forest.
As they rode along it, Marco told them about the palace.

'The grounds are enormous,' he said, 'so that the Khan can indulge himself
with his two passions, falconry and hunting.' He turned to Barbara and asked her
to guess the number of white stallions in the stables. She thought the question
meant there must be a lot.

'Five hundred,' she replied. Marco laughed.
'Twenty times that number.'
'Ten thousand,' Susan exclaimed.
'One horse is more than enough for me,' the Doctor muttered, in the belief

that his ordeal was almost at an end. But they still had two leagues to travel
before they emerged from the forest and saw the summer palace in front of them.
It stood in the middle of a large clearing encircled by the forest. There was a
high, red lacquered wall with a golden trelliswork along the top with a golden
dragon at each corner. Barbara estimated that the wall was half-a-mile long. In
the middle of it, facing them, was a golden double gate and behind the wall they
could see a central dome of gold, flanked by golden spires which towered above
it. As they approached the gates, two guards barely touched themwith their hands
and silently the two halves swung open. The Doctor thought it would come as
no surprise if the counterweights were solid gold as well.

Barbara and Susan could hardly believe their eyes as they rode through the
open gates. Side walls similar to the one in front stretched back and Barbara
realised that there must be a rear one as well. In the centre, dominating
everything, stood the summer palace. It was a low squat building of enormous
proportions with an elaborate cornice in gold around the edge of the roof, in
the centre of which was the golden dome. Four wide steps led up to a veranda
enclosed in an elaborate, delicate marble latticework.

'Those inside can see out but those outside can't see in,' the Doctor
murmured to Barbara.

All around the palace were pavilions where members of the Khan's court
lived. The grandeur of each pavilion indicated the status of the official who



occupied it but they all had beautiful gardens and small lakes. Marco led the way
to one of the most luxurious where they dismounted and attendants took charge
of their horses.

'This is the Polo pavilion,' he announced. 'It has three apartments, my
father's, my uncle's and mine but as they are both abroad in the Khan's service,
there is more than enough space for all of us.'

They went inside. There was a central courtyard with a floating garden and
the decorations and furnishings in the rooms surrounding it were so magnificent
that Susan thought that the pavilionmade the way-stations where they had stayed
look like hovels in comparison. A middle-aged official of important appearance
came into the pavilion and bowed to Marco.

'Mighty Kublai Khan will be pleased to receive Messer Marco Polo and his
honourable guests when you are all refreshed,' he proclaimed and left.

'We are in good favour,' Marco said with a smile. 'That was the Khan's
personal secretary.'

The Doctor moaned gently in sheer delight as he lay back in his bathtub
and thought that there would be no need to mount another horse - ever again, he
mentally added for good measure. But as he dressed, his aches and pains came
back with renewed intensity and he realised it had been a mistake to dismiss the
wretched animals so abruptly from his life. He should have eased the beasts out
of it, little by little every day.

Wearing his flowing silk gown and mandarin's hat. he hobbled onto the
courtyard where Susan, Barbara and Marco, all refreshed, were laughing,
chatting and waiting for him. The Doctor clapped a grim smile on his face and
straightened his back. Both actions hurt.

'Come and meet the Master of all Asia, Doctor.' Marco said.
'Fiddlesticks,' the Doctor replied but added that he would not deny the Khan

the honour of meeting him.
Leisurely, they walked across immaculately-tended lawns and gardens to

the four steps leading onto the veranda. The Doctor had been right. From inside,
it was almost as though the marble latticework didn't exist and they could see
the gardens, lawns and pavilions perfectly. They crossed the veranda to a very
finely filigreed golden double gate.

'The same effect, I suppose,' Barbara said. Marco nodded.
'Wait until they're opened,' he replied as two palace guards touched the gates

which swung away. If Marco's pavilion made the way-stations look like hovels,
Susan thought, the summer palace had the same effect on Marco's pavilion. It
was sumptuous. The building was square with a large central courtyard. The
walls, windows and doors were all elaborately decorated with dragons, snakes,
butterflies and birds with their eyes made of precious stones, diamonds, jade,
rubies, coral, aquamarines and pearls. The courtyard was a floating garden with
water lilies, fountains and four bridges which spanned the garden to an island
on which stood another elaborately decorated square building. But the most
astonishing thing of all was the dome. It was not part of the building. It was a
canopy of gold supported by four arched golden girders, reaching in from the
four corners of the outer building.

'That's where the Khan lives,' Marco said, pointing to it.



'If this is the summer palace, what must the one at Peking be like?' Barbara
asked.

'It is a walled city within a city,' Marco replied as he led them over one of
the bridges. Two more guards opened a pair of golden filigreed doors and they
walked along a marble corridor lined with painted lifelike statues of warriors.
Marco explained that the tradition of protecting the ruler of Cathaywith imitation
warriors had been started centuries ago by the Emperor Qin Shi Huang who
had six thousand made to protect his tomb, but no one now knew where he was
buried.

'Dig around Xian, which was the capital,' the Doctor suggested, 'you might
find something there.'

The two guards at the far end of the corridor were real and they opened the
golden panelled double doors leading to the throne room.

'Look up,' Marco said as they went in. The ceiling was a latticework of
ivory beyond which the golden dome could be seen. The throne was on a dais set
against the back wall which was draped with richly embroidered silk curtains.
The high-backed throne was of gold, studded with precious stones on the arms,
legs and the canopy. On the side walls were golden double doors, one of which
opened as the Khan's personal secretary came into the room. He touched his
fingers together, bowed to them and straightened up.

'When the mighty Kublai Khan appears, you will make your obeisance to
him so that he will look kindly upon you and spare your worthless lives,' he
announced. The Doctor recalled that the original invitation to meet the Khan had
been delivered in much more friendly terms.

'What, pray, am I supposed to do?' The edge of sarcasm was evident in his
voice.

'Kow-tow,' the secretary replied. 'Kneel before the all-powerful Khan and
touch your forehead three times to the floor.'

'I'll do no such thing,' the Doctor said indignantly. The secretary looked
startled.

'Kublai Khan is the mightiest warrior all Asia has ever seen,' he protested,
'and not to pay homage to him will cost you your head.'

'Paying him homage will break my back,' the Doctor retorted.
'Grandfather, don't argue. Do as you're told, please,' Susan pleaded.
'Quiet, child. I refuse to make a spectacle of - ' But he never finished the

sentence as a gong drowned out his words. The secretary raised one hand.
'Silence,' he called out, 'those who dare to come before the sight of mighty

Kublai Khan, kow-tow. Kow-tow before the War Lord of War Lords, all
powerful and fearsome in his strength. Kow-tow before the Master of Asia,
Cathay, India and other territories beyond. Kow-tow.' Marco, Susan and Barbara
knelt. The Doctor remained standing.

'Grandfather,' Susan hissed.
'Kow-tow,' the secretary commanded.
'I'll never manage it,' the Doctor complained as he sank awkwardly and

painfully to his knees with little moans and groans of agony. Out of the corner
of her eye Susan saw a most imposing man in a magnificent gold-threaded blue
silk gown with a silver belt around his waist. On his head he wore a hat which
resembled a bishop's mitre and he carried a gold staff in one hand.



'Kow-tow,' the secretary commanded.
'Aaah,' the Doctor exclaimed, but his cry was lost in a yelp of pain from a

little old man who was hobbling along with a cane behind the dignified man.
'Kow-tow,' the secretary repeated, as the little old man grabbed the arm of

the throne and tried to lift one foot onto the dais.
'Aaah,' he cried out which was echoed by the Doctor. The little old man

collapsed with another cry onto the throne and looked angrily at the Doctor.
'Do you mock our affliction?' he asked in a high-pitched, thin voice. The

Doctor was kneeling with his head several inches above the floor at which he
was staring.

'No, it's my back,' he said irritably, 'I can't move it.' With a little moan of
pain the Master of all Asia eased out his gout-ridden foot.

'What ails it?'
'It's seized up. I can't move,' the Doctor wailed. Mighty Kublai Khan turned

to the imposing man who stood at the side of the dais.
'GrandVizier, help our honourable guest,' - he pointed at the Doctor with his

cane - 'to his feet. And you, ladies, and you, Marco, stand up,' he added, waving
his cane at them. Suddenly, his face paled and he let out another anguished cry as
the Grand Vizier withMarco took the Doctor by both arms and tried to straighten
him. Susan and Barbara watched anxiously. Kublai looked at them.

'These gracious ladies accompany you?' he asked.
'Yes, great Khan.'
'You are most welcome to our Court,' Kublai inclined his head to them. 'The

Captain Ling-Tau has reported to us that the Lady Ping-Cho follows on with
another of your party and an escort. Also, that the War Lord Tegana has gone
on to Peking.'

'In obedience to your command, great Khan.'
'We shall discuss the War Lord's mission, Marc-ouch,' he yelped, and

pointed his cane at the Doctor. 'How did you come by your ailment?'
'I've spent the last seven days on horseback, Sire," the Doctor replied, 'and

it is a mode of transportation to which I am unaccustomed.' The Khan looked
concerned.

'We ride for Peking tomorrow, we fear,' Kublai confessed.
'Not another horse,' the Doctor exclaimed. 'I couldn't lift my foot into a

stirrup, let alone, mount the monster.' Pointing to the Khan's foot, he observed
that, for the life of him, he didn't see the Khan riding a horse either.

'We have a carriage of state and tomorrow, noble sir, you shall ride with us.'
'Most generous of you, Sire,' the Doctor replied and attempted a little bow

which sent a stab of pain across his back. 'Aaah,' he squeaked clamping both
hands over his kidneys.

'We shall be pleased if you will dine with us this evening,' and Kublai
ordered the Grand Vizier to make the necessary seating arrangements, placing
the Empress between the Doctor and himself. Then, with little groans and yelps,
he stood up gingerly.

'The audience is terminated,' the secretary intoned. 'Kow-tow.' A look of
sheer anguish crossed the Doctor's face. Kublai held up one hand.

'No, no, no,' he protested. 'We waive this mark of obeisance out of respect
for our noble guest's affliction.' He beckoned the Doctor to his side and he limped



over. 'There are healing waters here which relieve our gout. Let us observe their
effect upon your miseries. Take our arm.' The Doctor obeyed. 'What a burden
old age is,' Kublai sighed.

'A trial to be borne with dignity, Sire,' the Doctor observed.
'You are right, our friend.With dignity,' Kublai replied and with little 'oohs',

'aahs' and 'ouches', the two of them hobbled out of the throne room.



15 Gamblers

Shortly before the banquet, Marco was summoned to Kublai's personal
sitting room. It was small but exquisitely furnished with carved ebony chairs and
a low table with ivory inlays. The walls were hung with delicate hand-painted
scrolls and the window looked out onto a small, beautifully arranged flower
garden. To Marco's surprise Ling-Tau was taking tea with Kublai who waved
Marco to a chair and let him pour himself a cup of tea.

'What is thisWar Lord's tombLing-Tau told us about?' Kublai asked.Marco
looked puzzled.

'War Lord's tomb? Pardon my ignorance, great Khan, but I do not
understand you.' Kublai turned to Ling-Tau.

'Recount for us once again your adventures,' he said and Ling-Tau told an
increasingly astonished Marco all that had happened on the road to Karakorum
although he did not mention Tegana's involvement. When Ling-Tau finished,
Marco, who had long since put down his untouched cup of tea, spread out his
hands in bewilderment.

'Great Khan, it is not a War Lord's tomb, it is a caravan that flies.'
'A flying caravan?' Kublai exclaimed incredulously. 'From whence does it

come?' W'ith pangs of conscience, Marco recounted meeting the Doctor and his
companions.

'A caravan that travels through the air.' Kublai beamed. 'This we must see.'
'It is yours, great Khan, I claimed it in your name. But I have promised to

take the Doctor and the others back to Venice with me,' he added, hoping Kublai
would take the hint. Then he frowned. 'But how did it come to be on the road
to Karakorum?' Kublai smiled.

'It was being sent there by the Wrar Lord Tegana,' he said simply.
'What?' Marco was astounded. 'But there is nothing at Karakorum.'
'Other than Noghai's Tartar hordes.'
Marco put one hand to his forehead. 'But when I collected the Lady Ping-

Cho and the War Lord Tegana at Samarkand all that remained of Noghai's
defeated army was less than ten leagues away.'

'And now revitalised and reinforced, it stands at Karakorum with Noghai
at its head.' Kublai toyed with his cup. 'We shall be interested in the War Lord
Tegana's justification of its presence so close to ourself.'

'Then why did you command him to go directly to Peking, great Khan?'
Kublai smiled ingenuously. 'That is where our army, reinforced from our

southern provinces, is exercising. We thought it appropriate that the War Lord
should see it and realise that we, not him, shall be negotiating the terms of peace
from the position of strength.' Kublai leant heavily on his cane, stood up and
looked at Ling-Tau. 'Ride back and see that our flying caravan is sent directly
to Peking. Also advise the Lady Ping-Cho and her companion, the noble Ian, to
ride for our palace there.'

'I shall be swifter than an arrow in flight, great Khan.' Ling-Tau smiled,
bowed and left the room.



'Give us your arm, Marco. The healing waters had an excellent effect on
the Doctor's aches and pains,' Kublai said as Marco helped him from the room.
'When he told us his name we hoped he might be a physician and cure our
affliction, once and for all. But it was not to be.' He sighed. 'A caravan that flies
through the air,' he mused aloud and chuckled, 'that will put Noghai in his place.'
Marco thought that if it had reached Karakorum it would have had the same
effect on Kublai.

The Empress was a large lady and the Doctor observed that mighty Kublai
Khan was petrified of her, although when they spoke he frequently used terms
of endearment such as 'turtle-dove' and 'lotus-blossom'. The Doctor also noted
that the Empress enjoyed her food and he understood why Kublai suffered from
gout. In all, there were about a hundred people seated at the various tables and
approximately the same number of dishes were served. There was a choice of, at
least, fifteen soups, including one called a 'water-melon pond', and egg dishes in
profusion followed by fresh-water as well as sea-water fishes and crustaceans.
Then, of course, came the poultry dishes which reminded the Doctor of the old
adage that the Chinese eat everything bar the feathers. Next on the menu were
the meat and vegetable bowls served with a multitude of rices, after which the
meal was rounded out with a variety of desserts. The wines were of every hue
and taste and to the Doctor's astonishment there were Italian and French ones
as well as champagne.

'My father imports them,' Marco said modestly.
During the banquet and between mouthfuls the Empress expressed her

regrets that the Lady Ping-Cho had been unable to attend whilst her husband-to-
be, indicating a watery-eyed old man at one end of the head table, languished for
her arrival. Kublai patted the Empress's hand.

'Exquisite butterfly,' he said with a quick glance at Marco, 'the Lady Ping-
Cho was unavoidably detained at Lan-Chow.' The Empress popped a succulent
slice of pineapple roast duck into her mouth and suggested that another banquet
should be held on the eve of Ping-Cho's nuptials in Peking. Mighty Kublai Khan
did not argue.

Ling-Tau found Ping-Cho and Ian at a way-station just after dawn and
instructed their escort to take them directly to Peking, adding that he would ride
on to order the warriors accompanying the wagon to deliver it there as well. Then
he bowed to them and turned to leave.

'Stay and have some breakfast,' Ian suggested.
'Yes, please do,' Ping-Cho said a shade too quickly and, blushing, looked

down at her food. Ling-Tau took off his bandeau and belt and then sat down with
them. As they ate he recounted Marco's interview with the Khan and when he
was finished Ian shook his head in amusement.

'Whenwill Kublai, Tegana andMarco realise that only oneman, the Doctor,
has the knowledge to make his caravan fly? I haven't, nor has Barbara. Susan,
perhaps, because she is his granddaughter, but no one else. So it is a useless
weapon in their jostling for power.'

'But the great Khan and the noble Doctor have become friends so would he
not assist mighty Kublai in this struggle for dominance?' Ling-Tau asked.

'No, Ling-Tau, he would not and could not for reasons too complex to
explain.'



'Does it fly fast?' Ping-Cho asked. 'Very fast,' Ian replied.
'Faster than the noble Ling-Tau on a horse?' Ian smiled at her.
'Yes, I'm afraid so.'
'I would like to see the Doctor's caravan fly.'
'So would I,' Ling-Tau added.
'Perhaps you will,' Ian said, 'at Peking.'
The carriage of state was luxurious. It was long and had four wheels. The

sides and top were, once again. an ivory latticework apart from the central golden
doors and a silken canopy which could be drawn over the top if the sun's rays
became too strong. The interior was lavishly furnished with cushions and a low
ebony table. The carriage was drawn by five pairs of white stallions and there
were two drivers as well as the four footmen who stood on the back. In all, there
were three carriages, each slightly less magnificent than the one ahead of it. The
Empress and her retinue were in the second, the Grand Vizier and his in the
third. Susan and Marco rode white stallions and on either side of the procession
a line of warriors jogged. Kublai arched an eyebrow and glanced at the Doctor
reclining on the other side of the table.

'Do you wager, dear friend?' he asked.
'I've been known to, Sire,' the Doctor replied.
'The Empress disapproves,' Kublai confided.
'Ah,' the Doctor said, unable to think of anything else.
'Backgammon?' Kublai suggested, taking a box from underneath the table,

'to while away the time.'
'Why not, Sire?' the Doctor answered and Kublai opened the box.
At midday the procession stopped for a roadside picnic under a huge

elaborately decorated silk canopy. The Doctor found the snack only slightly less
extravagant than the previous night's banquet.

'And how did we spend our morning?' the Empress asked Kublai as she
stuffed a dried shrimp wanton into her mouth. The Doctor thought her choice
of verb was unfortunate.

'Conversing on this and that, precious fawn.' Kublai looked at the Doctor
for confirmation.

'The Dynasties of Asia, gracious Empress,' the Doctor volunteered.
Kublai clutched at the straw. 'We discussed our lamented uncle, Jenghis,

saying he was the warrior of the family, beloved panda. Nothing frightened him.
We are but a poor planner, an administrator of sorts.'

'The mighty Khan demeans himself,' the Empress said to the Doctor as she
reached out for a Lan-Chow steamed dumpling. 'His only weakness is that he
likes to gamble.' The Doctor thought it an appropriate moment to taste a sliver
of the chicken chessmen.

As they approached the golden gates of the palace at Peking Kublai closed
the backgammon box and put it under the table.

'What is the reckoning?' he enquired. The Doctor thought for a moment.
'You owe me, Sire, thirty-five elephants with ceremonial bridles, trappings,

brocades and pavilions,' he said, 'and four thousand white stallions as well as
twenty-five tigers.'

'That's not too serious,' Kublai commented.



'Plus the sacred tooth of Buddha and all the commerce from Burma for a
year,' the Doctor added. Kublai winced.

'Those last two debts are distressing,' he admitted. 'Marco brought us the
tooth from India andwhen the Empress is not at table she pores over the accounts.
Will you allow us to try and win them back?' He sounded wistful.

'All of them, Sire,' the Doctor replied magnanimously as the plan for
recovering the TARDIS formed in his head.

Marco had not exaggerated when he described the palace at Peking as a
walled city within a city. Architecturally, it was different to the summer palace.
There were no latticework walls through which a cooling breeze could pass. On
the contrary, the walls were substantial, designed to keep out the winter winds.
There were mosaic paved alleyways lined with houses where Kublai's retinue,
some fifteen thousand, lived. As at Shang-Tu four wide tree-lined avenues led
from the walls to the central square and the ornate palace which had more than
a thousand rooms.

The carriage of state drew up in front of the main entrance as servants
hurriedly placed the steps in front of the golden doors and helped Kublai and
the Doctor to descend. Carefully, with the aid of his cane and leaning on the
Doctor's arm, Kublai went up to the palace entrance where guards had opened
the golden doors.

'You know, dear friend,' Kublai confided as they went inside, 'we like the
summer palace very much. But, finally, we think there is no place like home.'
Secretly, the Doctor agreed with him.



16 Best-laid Schemes

In accordance with Kublai's instructions, the War Lord Tegana was
welcomed at the Peking palace in a manner that befitted his importance. He was
shown to a ten-room suite and twenty servants were assigned to him. On the
following morning the Khan's three military commanders called on him to pay
their respects and suggested that he might care to inspect the army. Tegana
readily agreed and they rode to a camp north of the city. It was a sea of
multicoloured tents and each one flew a banner representing the company to
which the warriors belonged. Tegana estimated that Kublai's force-of-arms was
twice the size of Noghai's but that did not dismay him.

On a nearby plain five thousand archers were firing at clay warriors. Very
few arrows fell short of, or missed their targets. On another plain ten thousand
cavalrymen with lances charged down on bags of straw suspended on poles and
elsewhere fifteen thousand foot warriors drilled in perfect unison. As they, rode
back to the palace Tegana invited the three commanders to dine with him that
evening and they accepted. Over the meal they discussed Noghai's defeat by
Kublai's army near Samarkand.

'It was your element of surprise that caught us out,' Tegana conceded, 'your
ability to travel so far, so swiftly and then fight. We were ill-prepared for the
battle. It would not happen again.'

'It is to be hoped that it will never happen again.' the cavalry commander
replied, 'as you come to the Court as an emissary of peace.'

Tegana smiled and thought they were fools, as was Kublai, if they believed
he had not understood the purpose of the day's exercise and he knew who now
held the element of surprise.

Kublai's retinue, with the Doctor, Susan and Barbara, arrived the next
evening and the GrandVizier had already arranged their accommodation. Dinner
was intimate, no more than forty people, and the Doctor noted that the War Lord
Tegana was conspicuous by his absence. The Empress, between mouthfuls, was
deciding the dishes to be served at Ping-Cho's pre-nuptial banquet on the
following evening and glancing coyly at the old husband-to-be whom the Doctor
considered had sunk irretrievably into his dotage.

It was mid-morning when Ping-Cho, Ian and Ling-Tau reached the palace.
Ling-Tau went directly to his quarters while Ping-Cho and Ian were shown to
their apartments. As soon as he could, Ian found the Doctor and told him all that
had happened. The Doctor frowned.

'Both Polo and the Khan knew about Tegana's attempt to steal my ship?'
he asked.

'Yes, Doctor. Ling-Tau reported it to Kublai who told Marco.'
'Yet no one informed me. When will it arrive?'
'Tomorrow afternoon, Doctor.'
'This requires thought, Chesterton. There is mischief afoot,' the Doctor said

darkly, 'but what?'
Ping-Cho found Susan's four-room apartment and when she saw her, burst

into tears.



'There's to be a banquet tonight to present me to my husband-to-be,' she
wailed, 'and we are to be married tomorrow. I can't do it, Susan, I'd sooner die.'

'Let's move your things in here with me.' Susan sounded brusque and
efficient. 'Then we'll work out what can be done about it.' But they could think of
nothing practical short of Ping-Cho throwing herself on her knees and begging
Kublai to excuse her from the marriage which would offend the watery-eyed old
man and her family in Samarkand, as well as the Empress who had taken great
pains to organise the feast. Worst of all, they both realised that Kublai might
reject Ping-Cho's entreaty because of protocol.

'What is so cruel,' Ping-Cho said miserably, 'is that my heart flies to
someone else.' Susan thought for a moment.

'Ling-Tau?' she ventured. Ping-Cho nodded. Susan whistled silently. 'Then
it's up to grandfather to persuade Kublai to let the match be broken,' she said. 'He
can be very persuasive, my grandfather, and he and Kublai have become good
friends.' Ping-Cho shook her head.

'Why should the Doctor intercede on my behalf when his flying caravan has
been taken from him in the Khan's name? No, Susan,' Ping-Cho sighed, 'there
is only one solution.'

'Stop that, Ping-Cho, no you don't.' There was a knock on the door which
Susan opened. The Grand Vizier and Ling-Tau stood there.

'Mighty Kublai Khan commands the presence of the Lady Ping-Cho before
him,' the Grand Vizier intoned. Ping-Cho grabbed Susan's arm. 'Come with me,
please,' she begged. 'Of course,' Susan replied and the four of them went to the
throne room where both Kublai and the Empress awaited them.

'Kow-tow,' the Grand Vizier ordered. 'No, no, no.' Kublai dismissed the
obeisance, wagging a forefinger.

'Fly to my arms, child,' cried the Empress. 'Let me share your grief.'
'I do not understand you, gracious Empress,' Ping-Cho looked mystified as

she curtsied. 'What has occurred?' Kublai beckoned her over to him.
'There has been a tragedy,' he said gently. 'Your beloved husband-to-be,

so anxious to be worthy of your esteem, yet more, your love, drank a potion of
quicksilver and sulphur, the elixir of life and eternal youth and expired on the
spot.'

'Oh,' Ping-Cho replied, glancing furtively at Susan but carefully avoiding
Ling-Tau's eyes.

'Will you not weep for a lost love?' The Empress's voice rang with
accusation. Ping-Cho hung her head for a few seconds and then looked the
Empress in the eyes. 'Gracious Empress, I grieve an old man's death as all would
do. But how can I weep for a love I have never known?'

'What is your wish, Ping-Cho?' Kublai asked. 'To return to your home in
Samarkand, or will you stay awhile in our Court to brighten all our days?' Ping-
Cho glanced at Ling-Tau and blushed, which did not go unnoticed by Kublai or
the Empress. Then she smiled at Kublai.

'If I may, great Khan, I would like to stay.'
'So be it,' Kublai replied.
'Your decision to remain will be the reason for our banquet tonight,' the

Empress exclaimed, mentally allocating Ping-Cho's late would-be husband's
place to Ling-Tau.



The Doctor held a council-of-war with Barbara and Ian in his six-room
suite.

'Within minutes of my ship being at the palace, we shall be on our way,' he
announced. Both Barbara and Ian were taken aback.

'How?' they asked in unison.
'I shall be in possession of the key,' the Doctor sounded confident.
'How?' They put the same question again.
'I shall have won both it and my ship,' he said grandly.
'Won?' They were suspicious.
'Playing backgammon with Kublai tomorrow morning.' He told them of

all he had won on the journey from Shang-Tu. 'I shall wager it all against the
TARDIS.' Barbara and Ian looked anxiously at each other.

'What if you were to lose, Doctor?' Ian finally asked. The Doctor looked
offended.

'That is out of the question, Chesterton,' he snapped, 'I am the infinitely
better player.'

Barbara crossed her fingers.
The banquet, for about five hundred people, was, in the opinion of the

Empress, so successful that after her third helping of Yang-Chow shrimp balls
she turned to Kublai.

'Promote him.'
'Promote whom, scintillating glow-worm?'
'Ling-Tau. Make him the commander of the palace guard or some such

position so that he is worthy of the Lady Ping-Cho's hand.' She stretched out her
chopsticks and plucked a sweet-and-sour spare rib from a dish.

'We take your meaning, beauteous butterfly,' Kublai replied.
The War Lord Tegana also had a suggestion to make. He wanted a private

interview with the mighty Kublai Khan in the morning. Kublai, with a quick
glance at the Doctor, was obliged to refuse but agreed to receive the War Lord
in the afternoon after he had received Marco's gift of a flying caravan. Although
Tegana's face remained impassive, the Doctor saw the shock in his eyes and
thought that now there was much more than mischief afoot. But it was none of
his business, he thought, as by the end of the day the four of themwould probably
be light-years away.

In the morning the Doctor went to the throne room where Kublai was
waiting alone for him. The room was even more imposing than the one at the
summer palace. Again the throne stood on a dais against a brocaded back wall
and there were golden double doors in the centres of the other three walls which
were lined with statues, busts and ornaments in jade, gold, silver, ivory and coral,
all of them on individual pedestals. Kublai was standing beside one in jade near
the back wall. It was round and reminded the Doctor of an ornate doorknob.
Kublai turned it and a section of the wall swung open to reveal a small
antechamber.

'The Empress doesn't know about this one,' Kublai said with a nudge as they
went in. A similar knob on a similar pedestal on the inside closed the wall behind
them. There was no lighting yet the room was bright from the phosphorescent
paint used to decorate it.



'Look,' Kublai said, pointing to a Judas-eye in the wall, through which the
throne room could be seen.

'And, Sire, if the Empress were therein?' the Doctor asked. Kublai chuckled
and crossed to the opposite wall where there was another Judas-eye and door
knob on a pedestal.

'It opens onto the corridor so that we may slip out and enter the throne
room with all propriety.' In the middle of the room was an ivory table with a
backgammon board on it. Two high-backed ebony chairs faced one another
across the table.

'Shall we play, dear friend?' Kublai asked.
'Gladly,' the Doctor replied and they sat down.
In the Doctor's suite, Susan, Barbara and Ian paced nervously.
'Grandfather's bound to win,' Susan said, 'think back to the chess games

crossing the Gobi desert.'
'And everything he's already won from Kublai at backgammon,' Barbara

added.
'Yes,' Ian agreed, 'the odds are on his side.'
An hour later the Doctor came in.
'I lost,' he said, and slumped into a chair.



17 Key to the World

The Doctor watched disconsolately from a balcony as the TARDIS was
delivered on its wagon in the middle of the afternoon. It was still on the original
platform to which Ian and Marco had strapped it months ago on the Plain of
Pamir. Carefully the platformwas slid off the wagon and carried by fifty servants
into the palace and the throne room.

'There's one consolation, Doctor,' Barbara said, standing at his side with
Susan and Ian, 'we're all safely under the same roof again.' The Doctor grunted
and patted her hand. From a window the War Lord Tegana also watched its
arrival.

'It flies, you say?' Kublai turned to Marco who stood beside the throne.
'Yes, great Khan.'
'Give us your arm and let us examine this caravan.' Slowly Kublai, suffering

from a recurrence of gout brought on by the previous evening's banquet, hobbled
around it. 'We find the caravan small, Marco, barely enough room for the
Empress and ourself, let alone our retinue.'

'On my oath, great Khan, the Doctor and his three companions were
travelling in it.'

'Is the caravan an optical illusion, as our magicians create for us to see what
we do not see? Measure the

dimensions, Marco.' Pacing out his steps, Marco walked around it.
'No illusion, great Khan,' he said as he helped Kublai back to the throne.

Kublai stared at his flying caravan.
'Summon the Doctor to our presence and do not bother to retire backwards

kow-towing.' Marco smiled, bowed and left to confront the silent group in the
Doctor's suite.

'Kublai Khan wants to see you, Doctor,' he said lamely under their cold
stares and, suddenly, was overwhelmed by guilt. 'I'm sorry. I should never have
done what I did. It was selfish and, therefore, unjustifiable.'

'Give the Doctor the key and we'll go,' Ian answered abruptly. Marco looked
at them for a moment and then nodded.

'I'll go and fetch it.'
'You'll do no such thing, Polo.' The Doctor jumped to his feet. 'Both those

keys are the property of the flying caravan's rightful owner, Kublai Khan.' He
pointed an accusing finger at Marco. 'You took it away from me illegally and
I naturally tried every recourse to take it back from you. But I lost my ship to
Kublai Khan in a game of backgammon and gambling debts must always be
honoured or redeemed. I shall comewith you to see him.' Leaving Barbara, Susan
and Ian gaping in stupefaction, the Doctor, followed by Marco, strode from the
room.

Kublai was still staring at his flying caravan when the Grand Vizier
announced that Marco and the Doctor awaited the great Khan's pleasure in an
ante-room.

Kublai beckoned to him for them to enter. As they did so, the Grand Vizier
intoned 'Kow-tow'.



'Do stop it,' Kublai cried, 'the very idea makes my foot throb.' Then he
smiled at the Doctor. 'Do you have a key to our flying caravan, dear friend?' The
Doctor glanced at Marco and then turned back to Kublai.

'No, Sire, Polo has them.'
'Them, dear friend?'
'There are two, Sire.'
'And Marco has them both?'
'Yes, Sire.'
'On you, good Marco?'
'No, great Khan, in my suite.'
'Fetch them for us.' Marco bowed and left the room.
'We are told, dear friend, that only you know how to open the door of our

flying caravan.'
'That is true, Sire.'
'Will you instruct us in the method?'
'No, Sire, I will not.'
'Why do you refuse us?'
'Because inside is a world beyond your understanding, Sire.'
'So we own a flying caravan in which we may not fly.'
'Yes, Sire.' Kublai leant back on his throne and winced. 'You should go on

a diet, Sire. Banquets are all very well but as Master of all Asia you should take
more care of your health.' Kublai began to chuckle.

'With our flying caravan, we are Master of the World, dear friend.'
'When it was mine, I never felt that way about it, Sire. I used it to travel

from A to B, or sometimes from A to Z.'
'You are not a Khan, dear friend, we are. And to rule we need the symbols

of power. The sacred tooth of Buddha confirms our dominance over India, this
palace over all Cathay and beyond.' Kublai pointed to the TARDIS. 'Our flying
caravan is also a symbol of power, absolute power.'

Marco came back into the room and held out the two keys. Kublai took one
of them and instructed Marco to have the second destroyed. Marco put it in his
pocket. Kublai turned the key over slowly in his hand and smiled at the Doctor.
'No, we are wrong, dear friend. Whosoever holds this has the key to the world.'
He glanced at the Grand Vizier. 'Fetch us immediately a chain of finely beaten
gold that we may wear this permanently around our neck. Holding the Key to the
World,' he mused aloud as the Vizier hurried out, 'that's even better than being
Master of the World.' He smiled and looked at the Doctor.

'We shall never play backgammon with you again, dear friend.'
'I am now fully aware of that, Sire,' the Doctor replied.
The Doctor and Marco walked back to the suite in silence where Ian,

Barbara and Susan waited for them. Once inside the main room Marco took the
second key from his pocket and offered it to the Doctor.

'I am not one given to repeatingmyself, Polo. Either honoured or redeemed.'
The Doctor sat down and shook his head with a sad smile. 'He has delusions of
grandeur, Chesterton.'

'Marco?' Ian was shocked.
'No, Kublai. He thinks he has the Key to the World. I'd like a cup of tea.'

He clapped his hands and several servants scurried in.



The Grand Vizier found a suitable chain and took it to the throne room.
Kublai threaded it through the key and had the Grand Vizier secure the clasp at
the back of his neck.

'A mirror,' Kublai commanded. The Grand Vizier brought one and mighty
Kublai Khan sat admiring the Key to the World that hung around his neck.
'Where is the War Lord Tegana?' he asked.

'In his suite, great Khan, waiting to be summoned.'
'Send for him and we shall discuss our revised terms for peace with Noghai,'

Kublai said, fingering the key.
The commander of the infantry found Tegana pacing in full ceremonial

Tartar dress, breeches tucked into his boots, a multicoloured blouse tightly belted
at the waist with his sabre tucked under it.

'Mighty Kublai Khan, the Master of all Asia, is pleased to receive you,' the
commander announced.

'Alone,' Tegana stated, 'I am the great Khan Noghai's emissary, therefore it
will be as if both Khans were discussing the terms of peace.'

'Mighty Kublai Khan is aware of that,' the commander replied and escorted
Tegana to the throne room.

While sipping his tea the Doctor had been turning over in his mind the
events of the past months. He was not overly concerned about the TARDIS. He
would retrieve it. Eventually Kublai would yield it to him.

But something in the back of his mind was nagging him and he couldn't
think what it was. Was it something he had seen on their long journey or a phrase
someone had uttered? He put it out of his head and chortled.

'The key to my ship making one Master of the World,' he remarked, 'when
one cannot even be the master of one's own destiny.' He stopped and thought
again. 'Master of the World,' he whispered and looked at Marco.

'Polo, do you remember the bandit attack at the bamboo forest?'
'Of course, Doctor.'
'Do you remember what their leader said just before Tegana killed him?'
'Something about Tegana being awake.'
'Before that.'
'No, I don't.'
'I do. He said, "so the Master of the World's War Lord Tegana is awake",

and he meant Noghai.' The Doctor dropped his cup and saucer which broke.
'There's not mischief afoot, Polo, there's murder. Tegana is going to kill the Khan
and Kublai has a private audience with him this afternoon. Quickly, call out the
palace guard, Polo, we've not a moment to lose!'

Kublai's personal secretary was with him when he received Tegana.
'Was this not to be a private audience?' Tegana asked.
'But it is. Our secretary is only here to record our discussion for both our

benefit.'
'I do not wish his presence,' Tegana replied and, drawing his sabre, slew the

personal secretary. Kublai recoiled in horror as Tegana calmly locked the three
golden doors to the throne room. Kublai tried to stop him but was hindered by
his gout and Tegana pushed him aside as he pocketed the keys.

'Master of all Asia,' he sneered, 'is that who you think you are? It is not
true. You are a gout-ridden old fool and the great Khan Noghai will wear the key



and sit on that throne as Master of the World.' Kublai clutched the key. Tegana
smiled. 'I shall decapitate you to obtain it.' The handles of the throne room doors
rattled, which made Tegana laugh out loud. 'It is difficult sometimes to have
access to mighty Kublai Khan,' he observed.

'You will also die, Tegana,' Kublai said, sitting back on the throne.
'That I am prepared to do as long as the great Khan Noghai sits where you

now spend the last few minutes of your life.'
'Our force of arms would defeat Noghai's again,' Kublai countered.
'I have seen your army and it is impressive, but you must take into account

the leadership. Kill the General and there is chaos.' Tegana walked around the
TARDIS tapping it with his sabre. 'The flying caravan of the greatest Khan of
all, Noghai.' He threw back his head and roared with laughter.

The Doctor, with the others outside, heard him.
'I know how to get in there,' he said, 'follow me.' He ran along the exterior

corridor of the throne room, looking at the busts and objects on their pedestals.
Marco and Ling-Tau, who was armed with a bow and arrow, as well as several
guards, followed him.

'This is the one,' the Doctor said and turned the knob. The wall swung open
and they went into the gaming room. 'Be prepared, Ling-Tau,' the Doctor
whispered. Ling-Tau charged his bow as the Doctor peeked through the Judas-
eye. 'Kublai's still alive,' he reported and twisted the knob on the pedestal. The
inner wall swung open and Tegana never saw the flight of the arrow that killed
him instantly.

'Redeemed?' the Doctor asked Marco.
'Redeemed,' Marco replied and handed him the key.
Kublai leant back on the throne and requested that someone close both

gaming room doors before taking the keys from Tegana's body and opening the
others.

'We would not want the Empress to know,' he said apologetically.
Later, they all stood in the throne room before Kublai and the Empress.

Kublai looked at the Doctor.
'We require a new personal secretary, dear friend. Would such a situation

interest you?' he asked with a surreptitious glance at the gaming room wall.
'Sire, we are travellers and it is time to move on.' Kublai touched his key.
'Does this really open your flying caravan?' he asked.
'Lend it to me, Sire, and you shall see.'
Kublai undid the clasp and handed the chain and the key to the Doctor. He

opened the door and gave back the key. Kublai looked at the Doctor intently.
'Humbly we think, dear friend, that you have the key to many worlds.' The

Doctor inclined his head. 'And we shall take your advice and diet.'
'Farewell, Sire,' the Doctor said and turned to Marco. 'Goodbye, Polo, have

a good voyage home but keep a sharp look-out for the Genoese.'
He said goodbye to Ling-Tau and Ping-Cho, then went into his ship.

Barbara and Ian said their farewells and Susan kissed Ping-Cho on both cheeks.
'Cherish her, Ling-Tau,' she murmured.
'I will, my lady, on my oath.'
Susan closed the door and the Doctor crossed to the central control panel.



'Dematerialisation, at last,' he said hopefully, rubbing his hands together
before he pressed the button.

Outside, in the throne room, Ping-Cho squeezed Ling-Tau's arm as the
TARDIS became a shimmering shield of light and then vanished.

'A flying caravan, Marco,' Kublai said, 'there's something for you to tell the
Venetians when you reach home.' Marco shook his head.

'No, great Khan. Half of all I have seen in Cathay is difficult to believe. But
to tell of this adventure would be impossible.'

'We know it to be true,' the Khan replied, touching the key that hung around
his neck.

To this day, in what was the Imperial palace at Peking and part of which
is now a museum, there is in one room a glass case with a gold chain and a key
on a silk cushion. The inscription, in Chinese, dates it from the Yuan dynasty of
Kublai Khan and describes it as 'The Key to the World'.

Revision Notes:
Ver 1.0: Converted to html and proofread by ST7



Table of Contents
1 Roof of the World
2 Emissary of Peace
3 Down to Earth
4 Singing Sands
5 Desert of Death
6 A Tale of Hashashins
7 Five Hundred Eyes
8 Wall of Lies
9 Too Many Kan-Chow Cooks
10 Bamboozled
11 Rider from Shang-Tu
12 Runaway
13 to Karakorum
14 Mighty Kublai Khan
15 Gamblers
16 Best-laid Schemes
17 Key to the World