DOCTORWHO
THE CELESTIAL TOYMAKER

GERRY DAVIS and ALISON BINGEMAN

Based on the BBC television serial by Brian Hayles by arrangement with
the British Broadcasting Corporation



1. Trapped

'Doctor, you've vanished.'
Dodo and Steven stared with disbelief at the hexagonal control board of the

TARDIS. A moment before, the Doctor had been standing there; now he seemed
to have vanished into thin air.

'What?What nonsense! Nonsense, child.' The familiar, slightly crusty voice
of the first Doctor echoed round the room. The Doctor's young companions
smiled with relief.

'Thank goodness you're still there,' said Dodo.
'But is he?' Steven interjected. 'I can't see him.' Steven moved forward and

waved his hand where the Doctor's voice had been coming from. It met with no
obstacle. 'You seem to have dematerialised,' Steven continued.

'Extraordinary!' cried the Doctor's voice. 'One could say I only exist through
the sound of my voice.'

'Do you think this is something to do with the Refusians?' queried Dodo
anxiously, referring to the race of invisible aliens they had encountered on their
previous journey.

'It must be,' Steven replied tersely.
'No!' came the Doctor's voice, 'You're wrong. This is something else much

more serious. We are in grave danger. This must be some form of attack.'
Dodo and Steven looked anxiously at each other. 'But,' said Steven, 'we're

still inside the TARDIS. Surely nothing can harm us inside here?'
'Evidently there is some great power that can penetrate beyond our safety

barrier,' replied the Doctor's voice.
If the Doctor and his companions had been able to look outside (the scanner

was not on) they would have been able to see that the TARDIS was standing
in the middle of a large octagonal room, not unlike the interior of the TARDIS
itself. From each angle, lines stretched to the centre of the room. The TARDIS
was standing at the exact point where the lines intersected.

The room was painted white but seemed to have some sort of inner
lumination, a kind of luminosity that radiated a soft incandescent glow. The only
furniture visible was a simple short wooden bench facing one of the walls and,
against the wall immediately behind the TARDIS, a wooden cupboard of a plain
antique design. No-one was inside the room.

Inside the TARDIS, Steven and Dodo were still standing looking towards
where they assumed the invisible Doctor to be.

'Don't just stand there.' The Doctor was now behind them. They both
jumped and turned to the new location of the Doctor's voice. 'Tcha, tcha.' The
others could almost see the Doctor's hand slapping the lapel of his coat, as he
did when he was irritated by something. 'Come and turn on the scanner.'

'But Doctor, don't you think -' Dodo began.
'Don't ask questions,' said the Doctor. 'We may not have time. Turn on the

scanner now.'
Steven ran over to the control console and flicked on the scanner, then

quickly looked up at it. The screen was completely blank.



'It doesn't show anything,' said Steven. 'It's not working.'
'Yes it is,' said the Doctor. 'When it isn't working the screen is distorted, now

it's perfectly clear. This is obviously part of the same trick that brought us here.'
Dodo turned to the Doctor. 'What are we to do then, Doctor?' she asked.

'Let's take off at once.'
'That might be worse.' The Doctor's voice was moving across the room.

'Besides, I'm not only invisible, I'm also intangible, which means I can't pull the
switches on the TARDIS.'

Steven stepped forward looking vainly around for the new location of the
Doctor. 'I'll do that, Doctor, if you'll tell me what to do.'

'But Steven,' replied Dodo, 'if the Doctor is dematerialised and we take off
now, he might never again regain his physical form.'

'You're quite right, Dodo.Whatever it is, we have to face it. Open the doors.'
Steven shook his head anxiously, 'But Doctor!'
The Doctor's voice came across imperiously, with that peculiar ring he used

when he had decided upon a line of action. 'Open the doors!'
Steven turned back to the control console, put his hand forward and touched

a control. The others heard the slight whir as the mechanism operated and the
door opened.

'Now, you wait for me here,' the Doctor's voice came to them as though
moving across the room.

Steven and Dodo glanced at each other. Dodo shook her head, 'I really think
we should go with him.'

'You heard what he said,' said Steven. 'And besides, how could we ever
follow him?'

'I don't understand,' said Dodo. 'If the Doctor's intangible then why does he
need to open the doors? He could have just as easily walked through them.'

Steven walked over to the door and glanced out. 'Habit, I suppose,' he said
over his shoulder. Then he turned back to Dodo. 'It looks quite safe out there;
I think we should inspect.'

Dodo shook her head firmly. 'You won't get me out there.'
Inside his ornate study, the Celestial Toymaker, the being who had captured

the TARDIS and its inhabitants, was surveying his extraordinary kingdom. The
Toymaker's study appeared at first like a room. Then, as you became accustomed
to its dimensions, you realised that instead of a roof there was a black immensity
of outer space and the twinkling stars of the galaxies. The walls stretched up
towards the blackness until they became indistinguishable from space and
merged with it.

Hanging on the walls was every conceivable type of toy, 'mechanical toys,
electronic toys, dolls, teddy bears, puppets, marionettes and masks, some
friendly and smiling, glittering with a malevolent presence of their own.
Scattered around the floor of the panelled, eighteenth-century roomwere a series
of antique tables,' upon each of them stood a doll's house or marionette theatre.
Some tables held various types of games, ranging from pinball machines to
chess, to obscure board games dating back over the centuries, many of which
had long since been forgotten in the mists of time.



The Toymaker was lounging in a black Chinese chair behind a laquered
Chinese desk inlaid with mother-of-pearl and scenes of Chinese life, after the
style of the Willow pattern.

Further around the room there was a collection of mechanical clocks: some
with figurines which came out and struck the hour with huge gongs; some, like
the ancient town clocks of medieval Germany with a series of figures led by
Father Time with his scythe that paraded when the hour was struck. The whirring
clickingmechanisms, the occasional cuckoo from the cuckoo clocks and the loud
ticking from the grandfather clocks produced an almost symphonic medley of
sound.

Incongruously, the antique desk possessed a series of switches and buttons
glowing softly with a carefully coded system of vari-coloured lights. In front of
the desk stood a triangular table with the letters A,B and C inlaid in each corner.
On two sides of the table, there were two chairs.

The Toymaker stood up, a tall imposing figure, dressed as a Chinese
mandarin with a circular black hat embossed with heavy gold thread, a large
silver red and blue collar and a heavy, stiffly embroidered black robe encrusted
with rubies, emeralds, diamonds and pearls set against a background of coiled
Chinese dragons.

With a wave of his hand the Toymaker stopped the cacophony of ticking,
clicking machines. He looked around the room with his deep-set glittering eyes.
'Let's see now,' he said, 'I think it's time to play a few games.' The Toymaker
smoothlywalked over to the first doll's house, a largeVictorian one, each roomof
which was furnished in meticulous detail with tiny furniture, carpets, chandeliers
and curtains. Inside sat a collection of small Victorian dolls dressed in the stiff
formal clothes of the period.

The Toymaker's long slender fingers flickered over them for a moment
while he considered, then he passed on to the first of the toy theatres. He bent
forward and pulled a thin cord at the side, opening the large embroidered
curtains. Inside there was a circus ring with bleachers rising up from the circular
floor, each with a tiny figure smiling at the antics of the two clowns.

'Yes,' said the Toymaker, 'I think you two will serve my purpose admirably.
You are very good at games: clowns always are. You can shrow Steven and
Dodo a few of your tricks into the bargain.'

The Toymaker reached in and drew out the two clown dolls, one in each
hand. One was a girl doll dressed in a baggy harlequin, one-piece costume with a
diamond pattern, a thick neck ruff and silk stockings. Her face was stretched in a
wide and inviting smile. Her nose was tipped with scarlet, her eyes wide open as
if in wonderment at the world; her hair swept up in the clown's traditional three
peaks ending in curled points.

By contrast, the male clown was a sad-looking fellow. Unlike his
companion, all the lines in his face turned downward ... from his long lugubrious
mouth to his red-rimmed, sad clown's eyes. He was dressed in a clown's costume,
a white baggy suit and ruffles edged with blue on his wrists and neck. On his
head he had a cone-shaped clown hat with a blue band.

The Toymaker carefully put the two clowns down onto the floor and raised
his left hand. On his middle finger, a large sapphire ring began to flash as he
pointed his hand towards the two clowns. Concentric rings of blue fire appeared -



flashing down and surrounding the dolls who immediately began to grow, larger
and larger; until confronting the Toymaker, were two life size clowns. Eachmade
him a comic bow.

The Toymaker smiled at his creations. 'Yes,' he said, 'I think you'll do.'
Meanwhile, Steven and Dodo were having a fierce argument. 'I don't know

why you always have to be so obstinate,' said Dodo stamping her feet
impatiently. 'The Doctor asked us to wait here.'

'But he hasn't returned,' replied Steven hotly. 'I'm going out there to look
for him.'

Steven stepped outside the shelter of the TARDIS into the room and called,
'Doctor, Doctor.' Timidly, Dodo stepped out beside him.

'What is it?' The Doctor's voice was loud. They jumped and turned. There
he was, visible and his old self again.

'I can see you,' said Steven.
'Everything must be all right then,' chimed in Dodo.
The Doctor looked down at his hands. 'Ah, you can see me.'
'It doesn't seem too bad here,' said Dodo looking around the room.
'It's a strange-looking place,' agreed Steven. 'Have you ever seen it before?'
'I'm not sure,' the Doctor shook his head. 'There is something about it that

is very familiar.'
Dodo completed her inspection of the room with its bare white walls and

two articles of furniture. 'It looks dead boring to me. Come on.' She turned back
to the TARDIS.

'Wait, child,' said the Doctor, reaching out for Dodo's arm.
'Why?' said Dodo with the obstinacy of someone with her mind made up.
'Well, I don't think that it was the Refusian influence which made me

intangible.' The Doctor clutched his lapels and threw his head back in a familiar
gesture. 'No, there is something here that I feel is important to me - to us. I don't
like the feel of the place any more than you, but I think someone, or something,
willed us to come here and we must face whatever happens.'

Steven, meanwhile, was gazing with fixed intensity at the wall. 'Look there,'
said Steven. 'It's me!'

Dodo peered over at the wall following Steven's gaze. She saw nothing: the
wall was white and blank. 'I don't see anything there,' she said.

'But you must,' said Steven, 'Look!' As Steven watched he saw himself clad
in Elizabethan type clothes, with a slashed doublet, thigh length boots and
carrying a long rapier in his hand. 'It's me,' he said, 'Look, Doctor,' he called.
'We're back in the Massacre of Saint Bartholomew in Paris.'

The Doctor who had been examining the cupboard in the corner turned
around and glanced over. Like Dodo, he only saw a blank wall in front of Steven
and realised instantly what it was. 'Don't look at it, Steven! Now I know where
we are.'

But his advice fell on deaf ears. 'It's changed, Doctor. We're on the Space
Ark, remember? Look there - the Monoids.' As Steven watched he saw a screen
filled with the monsters he had battled on the Space Ark carrying the survivors
of a destroyed Earth to a new planet. The Monoids were hideous shaggy beings
with one eye in the middle of their heads.



The Doctor became more insistent, marched over and pulled Steven away
from the wall. 'Turn away this instant!' he said. 'I told you I know where we are.
We are in the world of the Celestial Toymaker and this screen is hypnotic. He is
trying to dominate your mind. Don't look whatever you do.'

Confused, Steven raised his hand to his brow. 'But Doctor,' he said, 'it
looked so real.'

'There is nothing there,' the Doctor repeated. 'Nothing at all. You must
believe me.'

'What's the matter, Doctor?' Dodo chipped in. 'I couldn't see anything on
the screen. I can't even see a screen.' She walked over and suddenly started back
in amazement. 'I thought I saw something!'

'No,' said the Doctor, 'you didn't. Turn away quickly.'
Dodo obediently turned towards the Doctor. 'Who is the Celestial

Toymaker?' she queried.
'A powerful evil.' The Doctor's face darkened. 'He has created a universe

entirely in his own vision, where he manipulates people and turns them into his
playthings. He gains control of your mind through these screens. Be careful, it's
a trap.'

'Really, Doctor.' The Toymaker's laugh was low and musical. The Doctor
and his companions turned. There standing facing them was the tall, imposing
figure of the Celestial Toy maker.

'What a spoilsport you are, Doctor. I thought they would enjoy my memory
window.'

'Look where he's standing,' said Steven. 'Isn't that
'Yes!' Dodo echoed. They both looked around. The TARDIS had

disappeared; the Toymaker was standing at the apex of the lines in place of the
TARDIS.

"What have you done with the TARDIS?' cried Dodo.
'Don't worry my dear, just watch over there.' Almost hypnotised, Dodo

turned to look at the nearest wall, unnoticed by the Doctor and Steven who were
both caught up in the powerful hypnotic presence of the Toymaker.

'I suppose I should have guessed it was you when I realised the power of
the force field you put around the TARDIS,' said the Doctor.

The Toymaker nodded slowly, an ironical smile on his face. 'Of course,
Doctor. I have been waiting for you for such a long time.'

Dodo stared at the wall, which gradually became a screen and then resolved
itself into a three-dimensional picture of an English living room. Dodo looked
forward excitedly, 'It's home!' she said. 'And that's...' Her face suddenly fell. A
man was coming towards her from the screen. He shook his head sadly and Dodo
realised that also standing in front of her was her younger self dressed in British
school uniform: black stockings, gymslip and beret. As Dodo watched, her
younger self turned away in tears and hid her face.

'It's me,' Dodo's voice became choked with emotion. 'It's the day mymother
died. That's awful!'

The Doctor, suddenly realising what had happened, turned abruptly. 'Come
away, child, this instant!'



Steven ran over to Dodo and, seeing she was unable to drag heTself away,
swung her around. As he did so, the picture faded and Dodo buried her face in
Steven's shoulder.

'What a shame,' the Toymaker's smooth deep tones cut in. 'I thought my
little invention would amuse them and juggle their memories.'

'Your inventions are evil like yourself,' the Doctor sharply rejoined. He
turned back to Steven and Dodo. 'You must be very careful. Everything here
contains a hidden menace. Nothing is just for fun.'

Steven looked at the Doctor, being careful not to glance at the many walls
around the room. 'What's the idea of it?'

'He is trying to get us in his power and make us a permanent fixture in his
universe,' said the Doctor. 'That's the reason for those wall screens. He's using
your mind and imagination against you. Those are memory devices that project
difficult and upsetting times in your previous lives. You must fight it.'

Dodo looked up and pushed away from Steven. 'Can't we just go? I hate
this place,' she said.

'How, my child?' The Doctor shrugged. 'That's the question.'
'In the TARDIS, of course. As always,' said Dodo.
Oncemore the Toymaker, who had kept silent through this exchangemerely

glancing from face to facewith his hooded snake eyes, interjected. 'Ah, but which
TARDIS? Take your choice.'

The Toymaker slowly stretched his arm out. The ring on his finger again
began to pulsate and the circles of light began moving towards the wall. As the
Doctor and his companions watched, they saw the wall begin to change colour
and vibrate; then it slowly resolved into a picture of an endless conveyor belt of
TARDIS police boxes slowly moving by them.

Steven shook his head in confusion. 'There are hundreds of them.'
'Yes,' said the Toymaker, 'hundreds. Take your choice. Come, Doctor.'
'No!' said the Doctor sharply.
Steven and Dodo tore their eyes away from the wall and turned back, but

the Doctor and the Toymaker had both disappeared and the roomwas completely
empty.

2 Bring On The Clowns

Steven and Dodo looked at each other, filled with a new sense of dread -
first they had lost the TARDIS, and now the Doctor.

'Doctor,' Steven called.
'Have you gone invisible again?' Dodo echoed.
They listened for the Doctor's voice. Then Steven shook his head: 'He's gone

this time. That mandarin or whoever he is has spirited him away somewhere.'
Dodo looked despondent. 'I don't like it,' she said. 'We should never have

stayed. We should have got back in the TARDIS while the going was good.
'I don't think it would have helped,' said Steven. 'Anyway it's too late now.'
'Who was that man?' said Dodo.
Again Steven shook his head, 'I don't know, but we've got to find the

Doctor.'



Steven glanced quickly around the room but none of the walls was
illuminated. He pointed to the cupboard. 'Perhaps there's a way out through that
cupboard over there,' he said.

They moved towards the cupboard and just as Steven stretched his arm out,
the door was flung open. A clown's head appeared around the corner - the male
clown.

Further down appeared the red-headed smiling face of the female clown.
'I'm Clara,' she said. The two clowns stepped out of the cupboard and looked
around the room, miming wonderment mixed with a little anxiety.

'What on earth ...' Steven began. But the clowns immediately stopped and
put their fingers to their mouths.

'Shh' said Clara. 'Shush' said Joey.
'Better keep quiet, Steven,' Dodo whispered.
Steven, belligerent as ever, squared his shoulders. He didn't like being told

what to do even by the Doctor, but especially not from a couple of silly-looking
clowns.

'I will not!' he began, then paused as Joey suddenly extended his hand out
towards him. Dodo, irritated as she often was by Steven's tough guy attitude,
moved away from him a little sulkily. Clara put her finger to her lips and brought
a hand from behind her back revealing a large balloon and a hat pin; unseen by
Steven who was looking suspiciously at the clown with his proffered hand.

Clara, a figure of fun andmischief, pantomimed to Dodo not to say anything
and then knelt behind Steven. Dodo's face cleared - these were funny clowns.
She stifled a giggle. Steven finally decided that the clown did not offer much
of a threat. 'Hello then,' he said a little sulkily, and reached to take the clown's
hand in his.

As Steven shook Joey's hand, the clown backed away leaving his hand in
Steven's. It came away and stretched to a three or four foot long false arm.

Steven threw it down in disgust just as Clara stuck the pin into the balloon
behind him. As Joey gave him a little push, he jumped back nervously, falling
over Clara.

The expression on Steven's face was too much for Dodo. After all the
tension, she was ready for a laugh, and laugh she did at his furious face looking
up at them. The clowns also held their sides and mimed convulsive laughter.

Gulping, Dodo said, 'If you could only see your face.' She laughed again.
Steven scowled up at her and then scrambled to his feet. 'Very funny,' he

said, dusting his trousers off. 'What have you got to laugh about?' 'Oh, come on,
Steven,' said Dodo still gasping for breath. 'If you could see it from my angle
you'd think it was pretty funny too.'

She felt a tap on her shoulder and turned. Joey was holding a large bunch
of flowers. He raised them to his nostrils and did an elaborate pantomime of
smelling the fresh scents of the flowers. Then he made an elaborate bow and
slowly presented her with the bouquet.

Dodo gazed in wonderment: there were roses and carnations, irises and
some flowers she didn't even recognise - a magnificent bouquet. Her eyes
widened.



'They're not for me?' she said. She looked at Joey who gravely nodded his
head. Then she looked at Clara, her face fixed in her usual smile, who nodded
and gave a curtsey.

'Oh,' said Dodo, 'I can't thank you enough. They're just beautiful. No-one
has ever given me flowers before.'

She stretched out her hand, took the bouquet from Joey and raised them to
her face. As she grasped the stalks, a strong jet of water sprung out into her face
and hair, saturating her.

Dodo stepped back and dropped the flowers. Steven's loud laugh rang out in
the room. 'If you could only see your face!' he mimicked in Dodo's high-pitched
voice. 'We need a laugh, don't we?' The sight of Dodo's woe-begone face was
too much for him and he turned away, laughing.

Dodo reached in her pocket and brought out a handkerchief and started
mopping herself. 'That's not funny at all.'

'Oh, but it was,' said Steven, still laughing. 'I'm not at all sure I like these
clowns,' said Dodo. Steven turned to the clowns who had been pointing at Dodo
and mimicking silent laughter again.

'Can't either of you speak?' said Steven. He turned to Joey. Joey pressed a
button on his clown costume which made a slightly raucous sound which could
have been a raspberry.

Steven turned to the other clown: 'How about you?' Clara's mouth suddenly
opened, giving out a high-pitched voice that started low and rose up the scale.

'Yes,' she squeaked, 'I can talk, I can say lots of things. Once you get me
started I can't stop. I can talk about -'

'Right, right,' said Steven cutting in, 'that's enough.' He looked from one to
the other. 'Look,' he said. 'What do you two want with us?'

The smooth mellow tones of the Toymaker echoed behind Steven: 'They've
come to entertain you both. To play a game with you.'

Steven andDodowheeled and backed slightly away from the tall, thin-faced
Toymaker. 'Thanks very

much,' said Steven dryly. 'We've been entertained, andwe're not in themood
for any other games right now. Perhaps you'll tell us where you have taken the
Doctor.'

'Taken the Doctor?' said the Toymaker silkily, his voice taking on an ironic
edge. 'Nowhere! The Doctor and I have to play a little game together. You can
follow the results on that board.'

The Toymaker turned and pointed to one of the walls just as a robot
appeared. Again the Toymaker raised his hand and the robot slowly came
forward towards them. It was a large featureless black robot with arms and legs
and, in place of a chest unit was a large monitor screen; it had flashing lights
for eyes.

'If you watch that board,' said the Toymaker, 'you will see the results of a
little game the Doctor and I will play together. It's called the trilogic game. I'm
sure the Doctor will be a worthy opponent.'

Dodo turned to him angrily, 'We're not interested in your silly games, we
want to go back to the TARDIS.'

The Toymaker smiled and slowly shook his head. 'Not quite yet, my young
friends.' He pointed. Over behind them the clowns had been bringing a series of



objects out from the cupboard as if setting up for a children's game. 'I'm afraid
you cannot go back to the TARDIS yet, it's impossible.'

'Impossible?' Steven and Dodo spoke together.
Again the Toymaker smiled his cat-like smile. 'Well, not quite impossible.

But you'll have to win a few games first. At the end of each game you'll find a
TARDIS which may or may not be the real one.'

Steven looked at him. 'What do you mean, the real one?'
'Oh, you'll find out when you open the door,' he said. 'As you have already

noticed, I have many copies of the TARDIS around.'
'Are you saying,' Dodo came forward a pace, 'we have to win a game before

we can get to the TARDIS?'
The Toymaker nodded. 'Yes. Several games, in fact.'
'And if we lose?' said Steven.
Again, the Toymaker smiled and folded his arms in a classicMandarin pose.

'You will both stay here forever as my guests.'
Dodo looked at Steven. 'I think we'd better play this silly game, Steven,'

she said.
Steven shook his head angrily. 'I don't see why we should humour him. He

must be crazy.'
'That's just it. I'm sure he its crazy,' said Dodo. 'But we'd better do as he

says, otherwise we'll never get out.
They turned back to where the Toymaker had been watching this little

exchange with his usual amused smile. 'Well?' he said.
Steven nodded reluctantly. 'We'll play your little games. If we win, we get

the TARDIS back, okay?'
'But of course,' the Toymaker rejoined.
'And if we lose?' said Steven.
'That would be too bad,' said the Toymaker. 'You will never see the

TARDIS again.'
'Wait a minute -' Steven stepped forward angrily but the Toymaker slowly

vanished.
Dodo grasped his arm. 'You never asked him about the Doctor.'
'I suppose he's got this game to play,' said Steven. 'This I don't understand,

I'm glad we're not playing it. It looks very complicated.' Steven walked over and
studied the monitor on the robot which showed the triangular board marked A,
B and C. In each corner there was a pile of triangular counters piled up like three
pyramids.

'Then what are we playing?' asked Dodo. 'I don't understand.' The two
clowns came up to them and they noticed that the clowns had set up a series of
obstacles around the room. 'Look what they've done,' said Dodo.

Dodo and Steven looked around in astonishment. During their short talk
with the Toymaker, the clowns had performed a seeming miracle.

The room now resembled a cross between a gymnasium and an army
training obstacle course. There were two ropes slung over a number of sharp
pointed iron spikes. A series of stepping stones were placed on something that
looked like a carpet; a long thin plank was mounted over two sets of step ladders;
and a long caterpillar-like tube snaked across the room and ended up at a square



marked 'Home'. The floor itself seemed to have taken on the aspect of a large
playing board.

'It's Snakes and Ladders!' cried Dodo. 'Doesn't it look like Snakes and
Ladders, Steven. I had a set once that looked exactly like that.'

'It looks crazy and more than a little dangerous to me,' said Steven.
'Oh, I don't know,' said Dodo. 'It looks rather fun. I'd like to play it.'
Clara, overhearing Dodo's voice, turned to her and beckoned her towards

a glass booth standing in a corner of the room. 'You play from there,' said the
female clown. She pointed to Steven. 'He plays the actual game.' Then she lent
forward and in a loud comical whisper said, 'That's because he's got the brawn
and you've got the brains.'

Dodo couldn't help laughing, especially on catching sight of Steven's
disgusted expression. 'Forget it,' he said. 'Me play on that? Not on your life.'

'Oh,' said Dodo disappointed. 'But this is the game we have to play in order
to get back the TARDIS isn't it?'

Clara nodded. 'This is your game. If you lose it you'll never see your police
box again.' She looked across at Joey whose face was set in an even more
miserable expression than ever. The clowns turned back to Steven and Dodo and
nodded together.

TheDoctor and the Toymaker, meanwhile, were standing in the Toymaker's
private office. The Doctor was examining the cluster of gleaming hi-tech toys
which were suspended from the end of the room. All were deadly weapons of
destruction. There was a model of an advanced missile complete with a deadly
warhead, made to scale with exact measurements. Next to it was the long
gleaming black hull of a nuclear submarine. Above it, the thin elegant dart shape
of a supersonic bomber.

'You see, Doctor,' said the Toymaker. 'I'm not the only one who likes to
play with expensive toys. On Earth, these are considered the most expensive toys
of all. Expensive, because they are made solely to be played with, and never to
be used.'

'Pshaw,' said the Doctor irritably. 'I'm not the slightest bit interested in your
toy collection. Kindly cease this practical joking and let us go at once.'

The Toymaker turned back and smiled ironically, then walked over to his
desk, sat down and leant back, placing his fingertips together and looking at the
Doctor through the tops of his fingers. 'Patience Doctor, patience. You have only
just got here, now relax. It's so very nice to see you again.'

The Doctor came up, stood in front of the desk and slowly turned around.
'Now,' he said with a rare flash of humour, 'you've seen me, so let us go.'

The Toymaker laughed. 'I'm glad you haven't lost your sense of humour,
Doctor. I think you're going to need it.'

'What do you mean?' said the Doctor.
'Please sit down,' said the Toymaker. As the Doctor sat opposite him, the

Toymaker continued. 'The last time you were here, I'd hoped you'd stay for a
game or two, but you hardly gave me the time of day before you took off again.'

The Doctor stared at him. 'And very wise I was too.' The Doctor slapped
his lapels in irritation. 'And you've been conniving ever since to bring me and
my companions back here. You and your games are notorious throughout the



universe. You draw people to this place like a spider attracts flies. Then you
enmesh them in this devilish web of yours and they never get away again.'

'My games, notorious!' replied the Toymaker. "Really Doctor, you are quite
wrong.' The Toymaker motioned to his elaborate office: 'This is my universe.
All I expect people to do is to play games to amuse themselves. It also amuses
me to see them play. There is no web to enmesh them. If they continue to play
throughout eternity, perhaps they were - how shall I say? - fated to do so.'

'Fate?' The Doctor paused for a moment then leant forward and picked up a
small, perfectly made model of an astronaut off the Toymaker's desk and stared
down at it suspiciously. 'I suspect this fellow was one of your victims of fate.
Was he amused by your games?'

The Toymaker's eyes flicked over towards the small astronaut doll. He
shrugged. 'Perhaps hewas, Doctor but then he lost the game, you see, and became
one of my toys.' The Toymaker reached over, took the doll from the Doctor's
hand and put it back on the desk.

'But, like all my dolls, he will have a chance to play another game and regain
his human form. Surely this is what life is all about. We all play games, even
you, Doctor.'

'Your universe, Toymaker, has blinded you to reality. Everything is not
predetermined according to your desires. Humans do have free will.' The Doctor
leant back, crossed his arms and shook his head obstinately. 'I refuse to play your
games,' he said.

'But you are here now, Doctor, and subject to my will,' replied the
Toymaker. 'I have a doll's house hanging over there which should be just right
for you. It's full of furniture that exactly matches the period of your clothes;
Victorian, I think.'

The Doctor stared back at him. 'I should never have come out of the
TARDIS,' he said.

'But you're insatiably curious, Doctor,' said the Toymaker. 'That's why I
ensured that the scanner should be blank. I knew that would make you come
outside. Besides, if you had taken off immediately, you might have remained
forever invisible.' At the thought, the Toymaker threw back his head and laughed.

The two ancient enemies locked glances across the desk for a long moment.
Finally the Doctor nodded slowly in acknowledgement: the Toymaker had won
the first round. 'What game do you want me to play?' asked the Doctor.

The Toymaker smiled. 'At last,' he said. 'Here, Doctor.' He rose, turned,
and gestured over towards the table on which stood the trilogic game. He waved
his hand and the three piles resolved into one big pyramid. Each segment of the
pyramid from the tiny cone at the top to the largest segment at the bottom was
numbered. 'All you have to do Doctor is to reassemble these segments in the
same order they are now, on point C. He pointed to one of the three triangles
of the game.

Interested despite himself, the Doctor stared at the board and quickly
calculated. 'I'm only allowed to move one piece at a time right?' he said.

The Toymaker nodded. 'That's right.'
'And I'm never permitted to put a larger piece on a smaller one?' said the

Doctor, pleased as always when his sometimes fallible memory worked
efficiently.



'Absolutely correct,' said the Toymaker. 'And you have 1023 moves to do
it in, and that is the exact amount, mind you - no more or less. If you make one
mistake - you lose!' He crossed back to the desk and pushed a lever. At the far
side of the table, there was a tally recorder with two lines of figures. 'This is to
help you count. The top line shows 1023 moves. As you progress, the bottom
will record the moves you make.

When the two lines match, the game is over.'
The Doctor raised his head, intrigued by the challenge the game presented.

'I see,' he said. 'Can I begin?'
'Wait,' said the Toymaker. 'Don't be too impatient. Look at this.' The

Toymaker touched another button at his desk andwaved his hand at a large ornate
mirror hanging along with the other objects behind the desk. The mirror turned
cloudy and then gradually resolved into a picture of Steven, Dodo and the clowns
in the other room. 'Don't forget your companions,' he said.

The Doctor sniffed. 'You aren't going to make them play this game are you?'
'Good heavens, no,' said the Toymaker with a hint of condescension. 'This

would be much too difficult for Steven and Dodo. They're on a competitive
quest.'

'Tcha, tcha,' said the Doctor. 'You don't make sense, man. Competitive
quest? What do you mean? And who are those others with them!'

The Toymaker pointed over to the screen. 'Those are two clown friends of
mine. They're what we could call the home team. They're going to play against
your friends and win the quest.' Again, the Toymaker laughed.

'I don't understand you,' said the Doctor irritably. 'Quest? What quest?'
The Toymaker waved his hand at the screen again before answering. Again

the picture defocused and gradually resolved to a picture of the TARDIS, 'The
quest for your interesting little spacecraft,' he said. 'The TARDIS. All you have to
do is win the games and you can have it back, Doctor. But you must both win the
games at exactly the same time.' So you will have to pace your' - the Toymaker
bowed slightly - 'brilliant playing with the lesser efforts of your friends.'

Stunned by the Toymaker's sarcasm, the Doctor raised his finger and
snapped it in a derisive gesture. 'You couldn't vanquish me last time, and you
won't vanquish me this time,' he said. 'Nor my friends. They will beat your
clowns or anyone else you send against them, just as I will master this trifling
game of yours.'

The Doctor turned back to the table and sat down at the chair opposite the
counters, hoping that the Toymaker could not read the slightly anxious set of his
frown. The Doctor and his companions were really up against it this time. He
only hoped Steven and Dodo were as aware of the danger as he was.

Snakes and Ladders
Meanwhile in the Toyroom, the clown Qara was explaining the rules of the

game to Steven and Dodo. 'You start here blindfolded. It's really very simple,'
said the clown. 'You have to cross these obstacles safely without falling.'

Steven pointed over to the male clown with the sad face. 'What's whatever
his name going to be doing all this time?' he asked.

'His name is Joey,' said Clara. 'And I'm Clara. He will do it too, of course.'
'And if he loses?' queried Steven. Clara turned away. Steven turned back to

Dodo. 'No answer that time. Well, suppose we both manage it?'



'Then we do it again,' said Clara. 'Until someone loses.'
'Yes,' said Steven. 'Great future the Toymaker's mapped out for us! Okay,

chum, you want to show us how it's done?' He turned to Joey who was just
putting the finishing touches to the course. Joey nodded his head, beeped on a
horn which he carried at his waist and rang a little bell.

Steven raised his eyelids a little wearily. 'That means yes, I suppose?' Again
Joey honked his horn while Clara tied a blindfold over the clown's eyes. Then
she turned to Dodo.

'You must come with me,' she said. 'You can come too, Steven.' She led the
way across to the glass booth in the corner of the Toyroom. Inside was a simple
control desk and a large red button.

'This is the buzzer button,' she indicated. 'One buzz for right turn, two for
left, three for stop, four for start.' Clara pressed the buzzer four times.

As Steven and Dodo watched, they saw Joey feel for the rope, untie it and
swing across the sharp spikes, expertly feeling for and landing on the first
stepping-stone. He then started striding confidently across the remaining
stepping-stones.

'Well, if that's all there is to it,' said Steven, 'any clown can do it.' He turned
around expectantly, waiting for a ripple of laughter or at least a glimmer of
appreciation for one of his rare jokes. But neither Clara nor Joey even giggled.
Steven shrugged, regaining his offhandmanner. 'Well,' he said. 'There's certainly
nothing there that I can't manage to do. When do I start?' He looked to Clara.

Inside the Toymaker's study, the Doctor was watching Dodo and Steven
intently on the monitor. Now he walked quickly over to the Toymaker's desk
and searched for the inter-communication button that linked the Toymaker with
the Toyroom. He pressed it, leant forward and spoke urgently through the desk
microphone. 'Steven! Dodo! Listen to me: be very careful how you play this
game. It's not as innocent as it looks. So be on your guard. Watch out for -' the
Doctor went on ... but there was a click behind him and he realised that he was
talking into a dead microphone.

Whirling around he saw the Toymaker suddenly materialise by the desk.
'That was unwise of you, Doctor.' The Toymaker sounded serious.

The Doctor confronted him. 'I must warn them.'
'No,' said the Toymaker. 'You'd better attend to your own game. Go for

move 152.'
On the trilogic board, the pieces started moving of their own volition. The

counter number went up from 110 to 152. 'Keep playing,' said the Toymaker.
'And to stop you from interfering further, I shall have to dematerialise you again.
Like this.' The Toymaker waved his arm and the Doctor faded from sight.

The Doctor's voice rang out across the study as if to compensate for his lack
of visible presence. 'You are overreaching yourself, Toymaker,' he said. 'How
can I play this game of yours?'

The Toymaker considered for an instant then nodded. 'Let's see. I think if
we left you one hand ...' He snapped his fingers and the Doctor's hand with his
distinctive ring materialised over the board. 'There now,' continued the
Toymaker, 'I suggest you resume the game if you are to win back the TARDIS.'

There was a moment's pause and then the hand with great dignity picked
up a piece from one section of the board and placed it on another.



'I thought you'd see it my way Doctor.' The Toymaker's voice was almost
a purr.

In the Toyroom, Joey had just reached the end of the tube, and as he crawled
out, he felt the end of the square marked 'Home' and stood up. At once, a light
came on and flashed, reading HOME. He raised his hand, whipped the blindfold
off and clasped his hands in the air in a gesture of victory. 'We've won,' said
Clara. 'We've won!'

'Hey,' said Steven. 'Not yet you haven't. I haven't had a go.'
Dodo looked up. 'The Doctor was trying to warn us about something

Steven.'
'There's nothing to be afraid of,' Steven countered. 'I can do it. Now, let's

see. Rope, swing across, five stepping-stones, and up and onto the plank, across
the plank and then down and into the tube. It's a piece of cake,' he said and turned
to Dodo. 'Just as long as you guide me. After all, if he can do it, I can. Now
remember the signals and make sure you get them right.'

Dodo frowned at him. She didn't like it when Steven treated her like a child,
as if she wasn't responsible. She was a good deal more responsible than he was
most of the time, she thought. Steven went for things with the single-mindedness
of a bull - he was a good-hearted fellow and would do anything for anybody, but
he also caused trouble by, as the Doctor put it, bashing in before considering the
situation carefully enough.

'All right, don't forget,' said Dodo. 'One buzz for right, two for left, four to
start, and three to stop,' she illustrated her words by giving a demonstration with
the buttons as she talked.

'Good girl,' said Steven a little patronisingly. He left the booth and walked
out onto the floor. Clara followed him and tied the blindfold round his head.

'Can you see anything?' she asked.
Steven tried to look around but the blindfold was tied very tightly. All he

could see was blackness. 'Not a thing,' he said. He felt round for the end of the
rope and grasped it. 'Right,' he said. 'I'm ready!'

Clara went back to the booth and closed the door. She turned to Dodo. 'Start
him off,' she said. Dodo pressed her finger on the buzzer and gave four loud,
long buzzes.

Steven grasped the rope and then, testing it with both arms, he prepared to
swing. To her horror, Dodo saw Joey walk over to the first stepping-stone and,
while pretending to make sure it was safe, move it about a foot to the right.

'Look what he's doing! Cheat, cheat!' she shouted. 'Steven look out!'
Clara tittered. 'He can't hear you.' Dodo ran to the door of the booth and

tried it. 'And the door is self-locking.' Dodo looked around desperately and ran
back to the control panel. She buzzed three times.

Out on the floor, Steven, just about to swing across, almost overbalanced
as he heard the buzzers. He recovered just in time and shouted, 'Dodo what are
you doing? You nearly made me fall that time!' There was no answer from Dodo
so he once more grasped the rope and launched off to swing across the sharp
pointed spikes. Lowering his feet on the other side where he expected to find the
stone - he found nothing! - and swung back again like some jungle creature. He
lowered his feet to safety at the starting point.



'What have you done?' he said angrily. 'It must be you, youwretched clown!'
For answer, Joey only honked at him. Then Dodo buzzed once.

Steven thought for a moment. 'Now, let's see: one buzz means go to the
right. Well, let's try.' He grasped hold of the rope, flexed his muscles, pulled
himself up and swung again in a large arc right across the waiting pinnacle of
steel below.

This time, as he swung more to the right, he extended a leg and just found
the edge of the stepping-stone. Quickly, with the agility of a born athlete, Steven
released the rope and landed a little unsteadily onto the stepping-stone. 'Phew,
that was close.' Once more, behind him, Joey honked on the horn.

'Yeah,' said Steven. 'You'll honk from the other side of your mouth once I
get this blindfold off.' He started to gingerly stretch his leg out, feeling for the
next stepping-stone.

Once more Joey, pretending to be nonchalant, kicked another of the
stepping-stones out of the way.

Steven, having memorised the position of the stepping-stones, commenced
his obstacle race, and stepped onto the second stepping-stone. 'Good,' he said.
'Now, the next one is, let me see, turn left.'

Dodo's buzzer began to sound: one, two, three. 'Oh no,' he said, 'what now?'
This time, Dodo buzzed just once. 'To the right again?' said Steven. Joey honked
in the background. 'You just wait,' he said. Steven extended his foot but couldn't
find the stepping-stone. He tried once more, almost overbalancing, and finally
found the step.

Again, Dodo buzzed just once. Steven repeated a step to the right and the
final one to the left. He felt for the steps leading up to the plank, found them, and
sat down on the lower step, wiping his brow.

Dodo was angry. 'I don't see how we will have a chance at winning when
you cheat all the time,' she said to Clara.

Clara tittered. 'Cheat? No, we don't cheat. A few harmless variations makes
it more fun, don't you think?' Clara reached over and removed a hard-boiled egg
from Dodo's ear. 'Perhaps you need something to eat?' she said. 'Here.'

Dodo flung it down on the floor in disgust. The egg bounced back off the
floor and hit her square in the forehead. Clara burst out in a gale of giggles. Dodo
stamped her foot, infuriated. 'I don't think I like clowns anymore,' she said and
turned back, wiping her brow, to watch Steven's progress. Perhaps he was doing
better than she.

Through the glass booth she could see that Steven had climbed up to the
top of the steps. Then she saw that Joey was leaning against the further set of
steps and manicuring his nails with a gigantic nail file.

'What's he doing?' Dodo said, no longer trusting the slightest gesture of the
clowns.

'Isn't it obvious?' she said, not waiting for a reply. 'He's manicuring his nails.
And it's about time too.'

Steven reached the top of the steps and, stretching forth a leg, cautiously
felt for the plank. He tested it carefully, feeling it give under his weight. Then,
bringing his other foot up, started to edge along it towards the other end. As he
inched forward leaving the safety of the first set of steps, he began to regain his
old confidence. He stepped out a little more vigorously.



Beep! went the loud honk of Joey's horn. Steven swayed to and fro on the
narrow plank, desperately fighting for his balance. Gradually, he righted himself.
'What on earth was that?' he called. Again he heard Joey honking his horn. 'Not
you again!' he cried. 'I warn you!'

Joey reached down to press the top button on his tunic. A low vulgar
raspberry sound came out. Steven, furious, swayed again - nearly falling off, and
he began swinging his arms back to keep his balance. He stopped and pulled
himself together, remembering that he had to keep entirely cool. If he allowed
the clowns to get under his skin, he would be doing exactly what they wanted.
He shook his head. 'Games with clowns!' he said.

Steven reached the end of the ladder and Dodo, watching through the glass
booth, saw Joey comically mime his anxiety not to get squished in case Steven
fell off the ladder. This time, Dodo did not laugh. The gamewas no longer funny.

Steven jumped onto the top step, turned around and walked quickly down
to the bottom. 'There,' he said.

'Oh dear,' said Dodo, 'Steven's far too big to squeeze through that narrow
tube.'

'Well, Joey did,' Clara sniffed.
'Oh, him,' said Dodo contemptuously. 'He's not real anyway, I'm quite sure

of that. But what happens if Steven gets stuck half-way through?'
'Then,' said Clara with a smirk, 'we'll simply tie off both ends of the tube

and make a large Steven sausage.' Clara began to laugh hysterically at her own
joke, but Dodo merely frowned with distaste.

'I don't think that's very funny at all and, come to think of it, I don't think
you 're very funny,' she said, turning her back on the clown.

Steven was trying to get his broad shoulders into the tube. After numerous
attempts, he decided to go through on his back.

Relieved to see Steven enter the tube, Dodo rested her brow against the cool
glass of the control booth and closed her eyes. Now it seemed that Steven would
complete the course and they would succeed in getting the TARDIS back.

When Dodo opened her eyes, she gave a little scream. Down on the floor,
Steven's body could be seen wriggling its way through the tube. Above him,
Joey stood with a sword upraised as if to cut the tube and Steven in two. He
raised the sword. Dodo held her breath. Then, he paused, scratched his nose,
brought it down and started eating the blade. The sword was made of silver-
coated chocolate.

Dodo smiled in relief. However, the respite was brief. She saw Joey sieze
the tube and start to drag it around in a large U, so that it came out at the same
place were Steven had entered.

Dodo turned to Clara indignantly. 'Look what he's done,' she said. 'It's not
fair.' She pressed the button violently.

But Clara only laughed and clapped her hands like a small child: 'He'll go
back to the start line.'

'That's not the way to play games,' said Dodo. 'Let me out of here.' She
seized Clara by the front of her costume and shook her. Clara immediately went
as limp as a rag doll. 'Open the door at once!'

Clara looked up at her, her head flopping from side to side, laughing. 'I
can't.'



'Oh,' said Dodo in exasperation. 'You're just a doll.' She pushed Clara aside
and went back to the control panel. 'I shall never laugh at a clown again,' she said.

Meanwhile, Steven finally pulled himself out of the other end of the tube.
He straightened up and felt for the home square as he had seen Joey do. Instead,
his hands encountered the step ladder. 'Oh no!' Steven exclaimed. He reached
up, tore off the blindfold and examined the tube. It had been bent almost entirely
back along its length like a horseshoe. Steven realised he had been wasting his
time and effort only to come out where he had started. He was livid. He turned
on Joey who backed away hastily.

At the same moment, Clara -burst out of the booth, followed by Dodo.
'We've won,' said Clara. 'We've won!' Joey started jumping up and down, making
every possible noise with his various bells and horns.

Dodo shouted over their clowns' noise. 'You cheated! Steven completed the
course!'

Clara shook her head stubbornly. 'We've won. Now you'll never find your
TARDIS.'

'No!' said Steven stubbornly. 'It's a draw.We'll have another round with him
in the booth this time.' Clara held up Joey's hand. 'The winner!' she cried.

Dodo looked around, picked up Joey's discarded blindfold from the home
square and held it up to the light. 'Steven,' she cried, 'look at this. You can see
right through it. It's not a real blindfold at all.' They turned round on the clowns
who backed away looking somewhat crestfallen.

Steven held up his own blindfold alongside Joey's to compare them, and
then turned to the clown. 'No wonder you shot around that course. Now you try
it with a real blindfold.' Joey backed away, no longer in a joking mood. Looking
as tragic as his face, he began to honk his horn.

Watching them, Dodo suddenly became aware that the Toyroom was
becoming darker. The mood was changing from the bright, light hearted
clowning to a more sombre, serious note. Joey turned away as if to run, but
Steven grabbed his arm.

'Not so fast, laughing boy. Here, Dodo, put the blindfold on him.' As Steven
watched Dodo put the blindfold on Joey, Clara stood like a statue, silently
watching.

Steven turned to her. 'All right,' he said. 'You'd better go into the booth and
guide him.'

Clara, no longer smiling, turned slowly around like an automaton and went
into the booth. 'Right,' said Steven. 'Now we'll play the Toymaker's litde game,
but fairly, this time. Go on. It's your turn.'

Dodo grabbed Joey's hand and led him to the starting point. She waved
over to the booth and Clara gave four buzzes. Joey stood, his shoulders hunched,
looking old and haggard.

'Go on,' said Steven. Again Clara gave the four buzzes.
Dodo clutched Steven's arm and looked up at him with big anxious eyes.

'Steven, I'm afraid. Have you noticed he's not trying to be funny anymore?'
Steven looked around the room and nodded, as Joey swung across and

landed on the first stepping stone, then, carefully, step by step, made his way
across them to the foot of the step ladder.



'It seems to be getting darker in here,' said Dodo. 'And' - she shivered
slightly - 'there's a draught blowing from somewhere.'

They watched Joey climb up to the top of the steps and set his foot, a little
uncertainly, on the first plank. This time he moved stiffly across like an old man,
his shoulders hunched, feeling very carefully, a step at a time.

Suddenly the plank began to sway violently. Joey held up his hands in terror
as if he was going to fall.

'Steven,' Dodo called. 'You'd better stop him. He'll fall.' She started to move
forward but Steven stopped her.

'We can't stop him,' he replied. 'It's us or them, remember.' He shouted
across the studio. 'Don't stop now, go on!'

Joey steadied himself and commenced moving across the plank. His steps
were getting slower and slower. Inside the booth, Clara started pressing the
buzzer again and again.

'She'll throw him off,' said Dodo anxiously. 'Why doesn't she stop that?'
Steven shrugged and they both watched, their eyes glued to Joey's every move.
The cacophony of buzzing grew louder and louder and the clown began swaying
on the plank. 'I can't look,' said Dodo. She covered her eyes with her hands and
turned away.

Slowly, Joey toppled sideways and fell down. At the exact same moment,
the buzzer started buzzing continuously. As Steven and Dodo looked at the
control booth, they saw that Clara had fallen forward and was slumped over the
control button,

Abruptly the lights dimmed and went out. At the far end of the room, one
of the walls lighted up and there was the TARDIS.

In the Toymaker's private office, the tally recorder was now showing 349.
The Doctor's hand hovered for a moment over one of the counters, then made
a move. The voice of the Doctor called out with confidence. 'There. I'm only at
350 moves and Dodo and Steven have found the TARDIS, I see.'

'That,' said the Toymaker, standing behind him, 'remains to be seen.'
Steven and Dodo were moving across the room a little cautiously. The room

was only illuminated from the area in which the TARDIS stood. 'Is it real?' asked
Dodo hesitantly as Steven reached the door.

' She's bright, that one,' commented the Toymaker to the Doctor, as Steven
nodded excitedly and pulled the door open. The Doctor leant forward anxiously
watching his two companions.

Dodo and Steven rushed forward and inside. 'It's not the TARDIS at all,'
said Steven. 'Look!' Inside, there was just the square outline of an empty police
phone box.

'What's this?' he said. He bent down and picked upa piece of paper off the
floor. Dodo snatched it out of his hand and started reading it.

'It appears to be a riddle,' she said. 'Listen: Four legs, no feet; of arms no
lack; it carries no burden on its back. Six deadly sisters, seven for choice, call
the servants without voice.' She looked at Steven in wonderment. 'What on earth
does that mean?'

'It must be a clue of some kind,' said Steven. 'And look, there's a way out at
the other end.' The back of the fake TARDIS swung open.



'Perhaps this is to tell us where the real TARDIS is?' Steven shrugged. 'Or
perhaps it's just another game. Come on. Either way, we've got to find out.'

He stared to go through, but Dodo hung back, then turned to look at the
clowns. All she could see were two small twisted clown figures, now the size of
mere dolls. Shocked, Dodo turned and ran quickly after Steven.



4. The Hall of Dolls

'Steven!' Dodo ran up to him breathlessly. 'Those clowns, they've turned
into dolls.' But Steven waved his hand at her impatiently then motioned to a large
door at the back of the TARDIS.

'I think we'll find the next game beyond this door,' said Steven.
'Are you sure of that?' queried Dodo. Steven nodded and pointed. On the

centre of the door was a panel showing the Doctor's tally recorder. The top line
read 1023 as before, but the bottom line now read 415.

'That's the Doctor's move recorder for his trilogic game,' said Steven. 'This
must be where we go.'

The door was covered by a series of bolts and locks which Steven
commenced to undo. Dodo started to help him. 'There,' said Steven as the last
bolt was drawn, 'that should do it.' He pushed. 'It won't open.'

'It must,' said Dodo. She threw her body against the door. Then, as the door
refused to give, she stepped back impatiently. 'Oh, come on, Steven. It must pull
to open. Let's try.'

Both of them took hold of one of the bolts and pulled. The door slowly
creaked open. As the door opened, a shaft of rich golden light fell across their
faces and they moved forward in wonderment.

They found themselves in a large medieval throne room. Set around the
walls were ornate tapestries showing hunting scenes, intermingled with long
heraldic banners in rich shades of red, blue and gold. The room was thickly
carpeted, and facing them as they entered were four large throne-like chairs.
Each chair was different with fine carvings of interweaved flowers and grotesque
figures and heads. On each chair was a thick, red, plush cushion. And, strangely,
the chairs were numbered one to four.

Meanwhile in the Toymaker's study, the Doctor, with only his hand visible,
was continuing the game. His voice sounded satisfied as he gave the familiar dry
chuckle. 'Well, well,' he said, 'I haven't made a mistake yet.'

The dark, tall form of the Toymaker materialised beside him. 'Let us hope
not, Doctor,' he said. 'I would hate you to end up in my doll's house.' He turned
and indicated the Victorian doll's house. 'That is the fate I've reserved for your
two friends.'

'Oh, they'll win too,' said the Doctor confidently. 'Don't underrate them. I
choose my companions very carefully.'

'Not carefully enough, I'm afraid. They will lose one of the games and end
up like the two clowns. We shall be able to amuse ourselves for all of eternity if
it suits me. Then, the way I feel, my mood,' the Toymaker extended one of his
hands and looked at his long fingernails. 'My mood is going to be very important
to you.' He looked up at the scanner. 'Your friends have reached the next test I
see. They're in the throne room.'

This obviously started a train of thought in the Doctor's sometimes
imperfect memory. 'That game!' he exclaimed. 'I might have known. Steven!
Dodo!' he called out. 'Take care! It's chair number -'



Abruptly, the Toymaker reached forward and cut off the interconnecting
sound. Then he turned back, his normally self-satisfied expression becoming one
of anger. 'You're turning foolish in your old age, Doctor,' he said. 'Now I will be
forced to make you dumb as well as invisible. You cannot speak until you reach
the second last move of the trilogic game. Now, leave them alone to play their
game while you play yours.'

He changed the pitch of his voice slightly to give a direction to the trilogic
game. 'Go from move number 442 - and no more tricks if you please.' The
Doctor's hand moved towards the board. The Toymaker's face settled down to
its usual slightly ironic mocking look and he moved over to his desk. 'Well,' he
said thoughtfully, 'your friends managed to outwit my clowns. I shall have to
pick some more worthy opponents from now on.'

He pitched up a pack of playing cards and spread them out on the desk. 'I
think perhaps the Heart family.' The Toymaker's long fingers probed among the
cards and brought out the King, Queen, and Jack of Hearts. 'They've had plenty
of experience in a great variety of games.

'And now Doctor,' he said sharply. 'I must have a little chat with your
friends.' The Toymaker slowly dematerialised.

Dodo and Steven were wandering around the throne room, examining the
rich tapestries and banners and the ornate carved chairs that adorned the room.
'You heard the Doctor's voice,' said Dodo. 'I wonder what he was trying to warn
us about?'

Steven turned towards the thrones. 'These chairs I imagine,' he said.
As he spoke, the Toymaker materialised in front of him. 'I'm seriously

annoyed with your friend,' the Toymaker's tone was sharp and curt. 'Once again
he tried to talk to you. For that I had to deprive him of his voice. Let it be a
warning to you. Play the games according to the rules or else give up now.'

'The rules, you said,' said Steven. 'Ha!' He laughed scornfully. 'Your players
break them. They cheat.'

'Anyway,' Dodo chimed in, 'how can we believe anything you say?
Everything here is purely a figment of your imagination.'

Steven nodded. 'For all we know, that voice may not have belonged to the
Doctor at all. Perhaps it was you, leading us towards another trap.'

The Toymaker smiled a thin smile. 'I'm glad to see that at last you're treating
me with due respect.'

'Only as long as you've got the Doctor!' said Dodo. 'After that, we'll see who
the -' The Toymaker abruptly disappeared.

As Steven and Dodo gazed over to where he had been, the door opened
and two strangely dressed figures entered: a full-sized live King and Queen of
Hearts based upon the playing cards. The Queen was the tallest. She had a proud
haughty expression and kept her nose raised as though if she lowered it shewould
notice some unpleasant odour - the smell of the common people perhaps.

The King on the other hand, was a short, rotund, slightly bewildered-
looking monarch with an amiable, almost absent-minded expression on his face.
It looked as though he was never quite sure where he was or what he was doing
there.

'Is this the room?' said the Queen, her voice high-pitched and imperious.
She turned back to the King as he did not respond. 'Is this the room, I said?'



The King blinked and looked around the room. 'I think so, my dear.'
'Then,' said the Queen, looking over at Dodo and Steven with some distaste,

'I suppose these are the people we have to play with.'
'What, my dear?' The King glanced around and then shuffled over and

looked Steven and Dodo up and down in a myopic manner. 'I suppose so, my
dear. They seem to be a couple of peasants by their dress.'

Dodo looked down at her short skirt. 'I beg your pardon?' she said. 'A couple
of peasants?'

'Who are you calling peasants?' cried Steven, but Dodo caught his arm.
'Steven,' she said, 'don't you see who they are?' 'They do look rather

familiar,' replied Steven. 'They're playing cards,' said Dodo. 'We are here to play
our next game with a couple of playing cards - the King and Queen of Hearts.'

Steven nodded a little glumly. 'The Toymaker's warped sense of humour, I
suppose.' The King and Queen, meanwhile, had gone to take a look at the various
chairs. Now the Queen turned to the King. 'None of these looks at all like the
throne,' she said.

The King, who had once again gone off into some sort of dream world,
snapped to. 'Eh?' he said. 'Oh yes my dear. Not like my throne. Oh no, no. They
don't, do they? The Toymaker said we'd find them in here though, didn't he?'

Steven turned around to Dodo. 'What's that riddle again?'
'Dodo thought for a minute then replied. 'Four legs, no feet; of arms no lack;

it carries no burden on its back.'
'That must be these chairs then,' said Steven excitedly.
'But what about the rest?' she asked and continued: 'Six deadly sisters, seven

for choice,' she quoted, 'Call the servants without voice.'
'Oh,' said Steven disappointed. 'It can't be the chairs then; there's only four

of them.'
Behind them, the Queen tapped the King on the shoulder with her fan.

'You're not paying the least attention again, Henry. I warned you - if we don't
find that throne, the Toymaker will keep us here. We'll be playing cards for all
eternity, and thus we shall never rule again.'

The King turned his slightly vacant gaze back towards the Queen. 'Ah,' he
said. 'A good point, m'dear. Yes, got to find the throne. This card playing is quite
ridiculous; the monarchy is not dead!' He moved over towards the chairs and
brought out a monocle which he polished and then proceeded to examine.

Dodo had been watching this exchange with interest. She turned back to
Steven. 'What do you make of them?' she queried. 'They seem like real people.'

'I don't make anything of them,' said Steven. 'Let's just ignore them.' He
turned away. 'Peasants!' he muttered under his breath. 'They've been sent here to
distract us. Look,' he said. 'There's a passage over there. I didn't notice it before.
Let's see if there are any further rooms in this palace, or whatever it is.'

After they'd gone, the Queen turned back impatiently to the King. 'Where's
that Knave?' she called. 'Cyril! Cyril! Tormenting the Joker as usual, I expect.'

The door was pulled open and a strange-looking couple entered. The first
was a lean lugubrious-looking Joker, sad, stoop-shouldered, wearing the Joker's
cap and bells and obviously modelled after the playing card of the same name.
Behind him, there was a rotund, red-cheeked youth with large, round, innocent-
looking blue eyes. He was dressed in the garb of the Jack of Hearts. He was



carrying a short sword with which he was prodding the reluctant Joker before
him.

The Joker looked over at the King and Queen. His voice was wavery, thin
and nasal. 'Did you have to give him that sword?' he asked.

The Queen waved her fan impatiently. 'Quiet, fool! Cyril, what do you think
you're doing?'

'Oh, nothing,' said the Jack. 'Just fooling around!' He sheathed his sword.
'I'm hungry.'

The King turned to look at him. 'The boy's always hungry.'
'He's a pig,' the Joker muttered almost inaudibly.
The Queen turned imperiously on him. 'What did you say?'
The Joker waved his cap and bells. 'What's wet, goes down but never up

again?' he asked. 'Give up? The rain ... get it?'
'Stop talking nonsense, fool. Wemust find that throne before those peasants

stumble upon it. Where have they gone?' she said, looking around the room.
'Along that passage, my dear,' said the King, who was obviously a little

sharper than he appeared.
'Why didn't you tell me before?' said the Queen impatiently. 'We must

follow them. Fool,' she snapped, you stay here and keep an eye on these chairs.
Cyril,' she turned to the Knave, 'stay here with the fool and please stop annoying
him!' She swept on into the passage, followed by the King.

Steven and Dodo were standing in another throne room. This room was
quite different from the golden one they had just left. It was panelled in a dark
oak; wood that looked as though it had been weathered and darkened through
the centuries. On the two main facing , walls, there were four cupboards: each
of them shaped like the TARDIS. In the centre of the room were three more
thrones. These were plainer, with less ornate carvings, and without the cushions.
They were numbered five, six and seven.

Dodo gave a little start of surprise and pleasure. 'Look Steven,' she said.
'More TARDISes.'

But Steven remained looking at the thrones. 'Three here, and four in there.
It is the chairs. Don't you see?' he turned back to Dodo. 'Six deadly sisters, seven
for choice. I suppose that means that six of them are dangerous to sit in.

'And only one of them is the right one we have to find to win the game,'
said Dodo excitedly.

Steven nodded. 'Yes, it's a deadly kind of musical chairs. Just the sort of
game you'd think that evil toy makers would make up. We'll have to work it out
by elimination. I wonder how dangerous they are.' Steven walked over to the
first chair and was about to lower himself into the seat.

'No!' Dodo screamed. 'Steven don't.' Steven started up and turned towards
her. 'What's the matter now?' he said a trifle crossly.

Dodo pulled him away from the chair. 'Don't risk it. None of the Toymaker's
toys are jokes - six of these chairs may destroy us. That may be one of the deadly
ones.'

'A charming thought,' Steven nodded ironically. 'You're right, I'm sure.'
Steven looked around the room. 'Let's open these cupboards.'

Dodo shuddered. 'They're made to look just like TARDISes. They may be
as deadly as the chairs.'



Steven thought for a moment then shook his head. 'I don't think so,' he said.
'Don't forget, the magic number is seven and there are only four of these and
there were none in the other room.' He crossed over to the one nearest the door,
opened it, then started back in amazement.

'What is it?' cried Dodo, running over to him. She looked inside and gave
a little shriek.

Inside the cupboard were two life-size dolls, made up as ballerinas, with
large painted eyes, hair, short dance tutus, and ballet shoes.

'It's all right,' said Steven. 'They're only dolls. Let's see if there are any more
of these.' He walked over to the second TARDIS cupboard and flung the door
open. 'Here look,' he said. Inside were two more of the lifelike dolls.

Dodo had by now recovered her equilibrium and nodded. 'That makes four,'
she said. 'Let's see what we've got over here.' She ran over to a third TARDIS
cupboard and pulled it open. 'Look,' she said. Inside were standing three more
dolls: two ballerinas and one male dancer dressed in tights and doublet as though
theywere ready to dance one of the great classic ballets like Gisele or Swan Lake.

'Hey,' said Dodo excitedly. 'This one looks like Rudolph Nureyev.' She was
a great ballet fan. She reached in to pull out the male doll but Steven called over
and stopped her.

'Don't touch the dolls,' he said.
'What's wrong?' Dodo queried.
'There are seven of them. They could be the deadly ones, or some other

dangerous creature. The riddle said six deadly sisters. It matches. What was that
last line' again?'

Dodo tried to remember: 'I've got it. Call the servants without voice ... But
you can't call something without speaking!'

'Ah,' said Steven. 'They haven't got voices, that's true, but we have,
remember, so let's try and see if they obey our commands.' He turned back to
one of the cupboards and called out. 'Dolls! Come out!'

Dodo edged slightly behind Steven, waiting to see what would happen, not
at all sure she wanted to see these dolls come to life. But nothing happened. The
dolls remained where they were, leaning against the walls of the small TARDIS
cupboards.

Steven scratched his head. 'They must be the servants,' he said. 'Let's take
a risk then.' He reached inside one of the cupboards and pulled a ballerina doll
out, then pulled the second one out. He dumped them both on the floor. Next, he
moved down to the second cupboard and started bringing out the dolls.

Dodo, meanwhile, was standing there looking at the fourth cupboard. 'With
those seven dolls in the three cupboards,' she said. 'I wonder what's in the fourth
cupboard.'

'Are you thinking what I'm thinking?' said Steven suddenly looking round.
'Perhaps,' he said, 'it could be the real TARDIS.' He dropped the second pair of
dolls on the floor, crossed over to the fourth cupboard, reached out and tried the
door.

It wouldn't open.
As Dodo and Steven gazed preoccupied at the fourth cupboard, neither of

them noticed the other three doors silently swinging shut behind them.
'It can't be the real TARDIS,' said Dodo disappointed. 'It won't open.'



Steven snapped his fingers. 'But of course,' he said. 'We're being foolish.
How can it open? The Doctor has the key.'

'We've forgotten all about him,' said Dodo anxiously. 'I wonder where he's
arrived at in the game. I'll check back with the tally recorder, there must be one
here somewhere. They're in every other room.' She looked around and spotted
the robot, showing the Doctor's tally, standing near the entrance to the room.
'The Doctor's over half-way,' she said. 'Come on, if we're going to use the dolls
in the chairs, we'd better hurry before the others get here.'

Dodo and Steven turned to get the dolls only to be confronted by the King
and Queen of Hearts who had entered unseen behind them. The Queen nodded
meaningfully to the King. 'Those peasants again,' she said. 'What are you doing?
Caught you in the act this time.'

The King looked over at the dolls they were carrying. 'They seem to be
playing with dolls, m'dear,' he said.

'I can see that,' the Queen said savagely. 'The point is, what are they doing
with them?'

Dodo had been studying the King and Queen intently, and she turned to
Steven. 'They seem very real to me,' she said. 'I think we ought to talk to them.'
She turned to the Queen. 'We're going to use them to test the chairs.'

The Queen's eyebrows rose: 'Test them?'
'Yes,' said Dodo. 'Six are dangerous; only one is safe. You know, I feel very

foolish,' she said giggling a little. 'Talking to a playing card.'
The Queen was outraged, her chin went even higher in the air. 'playing

card?' she cried.
'Well,' said Dodo, 'aren't you?'
Steven tapped her on the shoulder. 'Listen,' he said. 'It's useless talking to

them, they're only the products of the Toymaker's imagination.'
The Queen looked even more indignant. 'We're as real as you are. Henry!'

she called.
The King shuffled forward. 'Yes, m'dear?'
'Let this wretched girl feel your arm.'
'Eh what? Feel my arm?' the King said confused.
The Queen impatiently grabbed Dodo's arm and put it onto the King's.

'There child. Isn't that an arm? Not much of one, I grant you - but a real arm
nevertheless.'

Dodo looked excitedly over to Steven. 'It is! Steven, these are real people!
Feel his arm.'

'I don't want to feel his arm,' Steven said a little pettishly. 'I'll take your word
for it.' He turned back to the King and Queen. 'Well, if you're real people, how
did you get in here, and how did you get into that ridiculous costume.'

The King nodded a little wearily. 'Oh,' he said. 'It would take too long to
explain m'boy, but we're victims of the Toymaker, same as you. Now for
instance, if I were to sit in this chair I expect -'

He was about to sit in one of the thrones until the Queen screamed at him.
'Don't sit there! You don't know what will happen!'

'No, of course,' said the King. 'What do we do?'



'We'll have to use the dolls,' said the Queen imperiously. 'Let's each choose
a doll and then we can take turns to test out the thrones. Then we'll find out the
answer.'

Dodo looked back a little indignantly. 'But that's not fair,' she said. 'We
found the dolls, they're ours!Wewere supposed to be playing against each other.'

'But that can't be right,' said the Queen. 'There are four dolls and four of us.
We must be meant to have one each. That's what's fair!'

'Then,' said the King, 'we all have a chance to test a chair before sitting on
it ourselves.'

Dodo looked confused for a minute. 'What do youmean one each?' she said.
'What about -' Before she could go any further, Steven quickly cut in. 'It's all
right Dodo.'

Dodo still looked confused. 'But what about -' she pointed over to the other
cupboards which contained the three dolls.

'I said,' said Steven meaningfully, 'that it'll be all right.'
He edged a little closer to her and said under his breath, 'Belt up.' Then he

turned to the King and Queen. 'Go ahead,' he said. 'Choose your dolls.'
Dodo, still pursuing her line of thought, said, 'I don't understand,' she said

to Steven. 'What about the others?'
This time it was the King who cut in. 'Now,' he said, 'don't you fuss yourself,

m'dear. The point of this game is to see who picks the chair that isn't dangerous.
Whoever does that is the winner. If you win you get your TARDIS back. If we
win we get our liberty. All quite simple.'

'They're quite right, Dodo,' said Steven. 'Choose your doll and keep quiet!
Come on.'

Dodo nodded. 'Verywell.' Steven andDodo each picked up a doll and set off
towards the first throne room. 'Oh, are you going?' said the King, just noticing.

'We'll see you later,' said Steven.
The Queen said, 'I thought we were going to play this together.'
'As there are seven chairs, I thought that Dodo and I might try our luck in

the other room. Then we'll all have an equal chance.
'Oh,' said the King. 'Certainly, certainly, anything you like. Good luck.'
Steven, still carrying the doll, walked over to the passageway and called to

Dodo, 'Dodo get a move on!'
'All right,' said Dodo a trifle crossly, 'I'm coming. They're rather big for me

to handle.' She followed Steven outside.
After they left, the King turned back to the Queen. 'Charming young couple,

aren't they.'
The Queen frowned. 'It's not very charming to be told you're not real. I was

not amused. Now, which throne.'
'Well,' said the King. 'None of them look much like my throne, m'dear.'
'Then just pick one out at random,' said the Queen.
The King closed his eyes and started: 'Eeny, meeny, miney, mo.' When he

got to mo, he was about to put his hand on one of the chairs when the Queen
stopped him. 'No, Henry,' she said. 'Put the doll on it - not your hand.'

The King picked the doll up off the floor and threw it on chair number
seven. As soon as the doll landed, two clamps came out of the chair - one across



the legs, one across the chest, fastening the doll firmly to the chair which then
began to vibrate furiously.

'Henry!' cried the Queen appalled. The Hearts looked at the chair. The doll
was shaking so rapidly that it seemed that her head would come off.



5. Siege Perilous

Dodo and Steven, preoccupied in dragging their huge life-size ballerina
dolls, didn't notice the Joker and Cyril dozing on the thick carpets of the throne
room, until Steven fell over them.

'What on earth?' he bagan and then looked down as the Joker squirmed away
from him. 'Oh no,' he said. 'Look at this, Dodo. More playing cards!'

Dodo looked down at them and couldn't help smiling at the lugubrious
shocked expression of the Joker. 'Look,' she said. 'That one's a Joker and there,
there's a Jack.'

Steven picked up the doll, which he had dropped as he tripped, and dragged
it over nearer the thrones. He beckoned to Dodo to come over and join him.

When she came up to him, he said in a quick whisper, 'Leave them alone.
Concentrate. You nearly gave the game away in the other room. They think there
are only four dolls. If everyone picks the wrong chair for the dolls, then we are
going to need these others. That's why I wanted you to keep quiet about them.'

This outraged Dodo's English sense of fair play. 'Oh, but that's not fair,' she
said. 'I mean, they seem so nice and friendly.'

Steven scowled at her. 'That's what you said about the two clowns and they
cheated, didn't they? Can't you remember that we must beat every opponent the
Toymaker throws up against us. Otherwise, we'll never get the TARDIS back.
This is not a party, you know. This is as dangerous as meeting theMonoids. Only
this time, we haven't got space guns to defend us. We've only got our wits.'

'Are you sure,' said Dodo, 'that if we explained that to the King and Queen,
they wouldn't help us.'

Steven shook his head: 'It's too great a risk to take. They belong to the
Toymaker, always remember that. He wants to keep us here, or at any rate, he
wants to keep the Doctor here.'

'I don't understand that,' said Dodo. 'Why does he want to keep the Doctor
here?'

'I don't know,' Steven shook his head. 'And it doesn't really matter does it?
The important thing is that we must find the TARDIS before he completes all the
moves of the game he's playing with the Toymaker. Now,' he said, 'the important
thing seems to be to find the lucky chair before the others and sit in it like any
other game of musical chairs. Throw your doll,' he said, 'into one of those chairs.'

'Throw it!' exclaimed Dodo. 'It's heavy. I'll just put it there.' She started to
lift the doll.

Steven stopped her. 'Look,' he said, 'if you place it in the chair you might
get hurt. There might be some form of electric current. I don't want to see either
of us electrocuted. Give it to me and I'll throw it on.'

Dodo handed the doll over to Steven who flung it onto the chair marked
'three'. There was a flash which made them start back. Thick black smoke started
pouring from the doll.

'Faugh,' exclaimed Steven vainly beating at the clouds of smoke given off
by the chair and the doll. The smoke began to clear and they could see the doll,
charred, singed and blackened, sprawling grotesquely across the seat.



'Oh no,' said Dodo. 'What happened to her?'
'There,' said Steven. 'As I suspected, some kind of electrocution. That could

have been us.'
Dodo nodded grimly. 'I see what you mean by it not being a party.'
Behind them, Cyril the Jack slowly shook himself, overhearing the last

sentence. He sat up. 'Party,' he said. 'Is it time for tea yet? I smell crumpets
toasting.' He looked over at the burnt doll then wrinkled his nose. 'Or perhaps
not crumpets,' he said. 'What's that?' The Jack rose up quickly, looked at Steven
and Dodo, and nervously backed away from the chair.

'Don't be scared of us,' said Dodo. She moved towards him but he turned
and bolted into the passage to the other throne room.

Steven, meanwhile, had raised the other doll. 'Stand by,' he said. 'It's time
we tried out chair number one.' Steven raised his doll and flung it onto the chair.

There was a slow whirring noise and a blade, protruding from the back of
the chair, sliced the doll neatly in half which flopped over onto the floor.

Dodo screamed. 'It's horrible,' she said. 'The Toymaker must be mad! Do
you really think he wants to kill us?'

Steven indicated the two dolls: 'What do you think?'
'But what do we do now?' asked Dodo.
'We go and get another doll. We've got to get out of this place!' said Steven.
'But we can't go in there,' said Dodo.
'Why?' asked Steven.
'If we go in there and open the cupboard, they'll find out about the three

extra dolls!'
Inside the throne room, the now headless doll was still shaking furiously

in chair number seven. The Queen turned to the King. 'Henry,' she said, 'Will
you turn that thing off?'

The King made a half ineffectual motion towards the throne. 'I don't think
I can get near enough, m'dear,' he said. Suddenly the chair stopped shaking and
the doll was released, bits and pieces falling onto the floor.

'I wish you'd stop these silly games,' said a voice behind them. They turned
to see Cyril.

The King smiled at him. 'There's a nice chair for you over there,' he said.
He pointed to number four.

Cyril looked up appalled and shrunk back clutching the Queen's dress. 'Did
you hear him, mother?'

'Henry!' said the Queen indignantly.
Cyril sidled round behind her. 'Oh nothing,' said the King. 'A harmless joke,

m'dear. Well, let's try the other doll, shall we?'
The King turned, picked up the remaining doll, carried it over to chair

number four, hesitated and then flung it on the chair. As they watched, the doll
and chair slowly faded away to nothing. 'Well,' said the Queen. 'That leaves us
chairs number five and number six. What do you suggest we do now?'

The King thought for a moment. 'Perhaps we'd better see how the young
people are making out in their room.'

'They obviously haven't found it yet,' said the Queen. 'We would have had
a visit from the Toymaker if they had. He would have been very cross.'



'Yes,' said the King thinking. He tapped his brow. 'You know what we need
- we need two more dolls. He looked regretfully at Cyril, now unconcernedly
tucking into a banana he had discovered in one of his pockets. Then, turning
back to the Queen with a sudden inspiration, he said, 'I know - the fool!'

The Queen looked at himwith disdain. 'How can you think of entertainment
at a time like this?' Then she followed his gaze to the remaining chair. 'Oh,' she
said. 'I see. Of course, the fool!'

The King nodded meaningfully. 'Precisely, m'dear,' he said. He offered his
arm to the Queen and they turned to leave for the other room. Cyril stopped
eating the banana, glanced back fearfully at the chairs and the broken dolls, then
scuttled after them.

Meanwile, Steven was lying partly under chair number two. As Dodo
watched, he put a tentative hand up towards it. 'No!' she screamed at him. 'Steven,
be careful!'

Steven crawled out from under. 'You can't tell anything by looking at it,' he
said. 'We'll just have to get those other two dolls.'

'Shush,' said Dodo, 'the King and Queen are coming.'
Steven nodded. 'Good. I'll try to distract them. I'll hold them here while you

slip along to the other room and try the other chair. That will eliminate that room
completely and then it will be one of these two chairs.'

The King and Queen entered. 'Ah,' said the King breezily. 'We've been
having a great time trying out our thrones.'

'Yes,' said the Queen to Dodo. 'Why don't you try one of those chairs, child?'
Dodo put her tongue out at her. 'Why don't you?'
'Oh,' the Queen exclaimed and turned her back on Dodo.
Steven turned to the King. 'So you've had no luck either? Well, if you're

out of dolls too,' Steven winked quickly at Dodo who turned and ran down the
passage between the two rooms, 'it looks rather like stalemate.'

'Ah, not quite, m'boy', said the King. 'We still have another card to play.' He
laughed slightly. 'If you'll pardon the expression.' The King turned and looked
down at the sleeping Joker, then stirred him with his foot.

The Joker stirred sleepily and slowly clambered up to his feet. 'What's black
and white and read all over?' he said.

Steven looked puzzled for a moment. 'I don't know,' he said. 'A newspaper,'
said the Joker.

'Oh, I didn't wake you up for a joke, m'boy,' said the King. 'Anyway, I've
heard all your riddles before. No, we just want your advice this time, don't we
m'dear?' he said to the Queen.

The Queen looked her most haughty. 'What!' she said. 'Advice from a fool?'
The King cocked his eyebrow at her. 'To pick our new throne, m'dear. Eh,

what?' he said. 'Now, for instance' - he turned to the Joker - 'what would you say
to this fine throne here?' The King took the Joker's arm and led him over to chair
number two. Steven grasped what the King was after and ran forward, blocking
their way to the throne.

'Uh, uh,' Steven said. 'Not in this chair.' The Joker looked confusedly from
the King to Steven wondering what the fuss was about, when Dodo ran into the
room. 'Steven,' she said. 'The cupboard with the other three dolls, it's locked! I
can't open it.'



Steven turned back. 'You must be able to, it was open before.'
The Queen turned, outraged. 'What?' she said. 'Three more dolls?'
The King raised his finger and waggled it. 'And you were keeping them

from us? Naughty.'
'Cheats,' said the Queen in her deepest voice.
'You can talk,' said Steven. 'After what you were about to do to that poor

fellow.' Steven pointed to the Joker.
'Eh?' said the Joker. 'What's that?'
'Nothing, my dear old chap,' said the King, calming him. 'Come with us.

We won't leave you in such company.'
'No, certainly not,' said the Queen. 'I abhor cheats. Come, Cyril.' The King

and Queen swept out of the room. Cyril put his tongue out at Steven and Dodo
and ran after them. The Joker hesitated, lost in some train of thought and walked
after them muttering, 'Poor fellow? Poor fellow?' to himself.

As soon as the Hearts had left the room, Steven turned angrily back to Dodo.
'Now you've done it. Handed the game to them on a platter. If the right chair is
not in this room, we've lost the game.'

Dodo folded her arms obstinately. 'I don't see that,' she said. 'Anyway, we'll
win fairly.'

'Look,' said Steven explaining. 'They have two chairs left, right? They'll get
the Joker to sit on one. If that's not the right chair, then the other must be the
winner.' Steven gave Dodo a long look of disgust, then turned away from her
and crossed his arms.

Feeling guilty, Dodo ran up to him, but he just turned away. Almost in
tears at having ruined their chances, Dodo turned back towards the chairs. Then,
coming to a sudden resolution, she walked over to chair number two and started
to lower herself upon it.

In the Toymaker's study, the Toymaker was leaning back watching the hand
of the Doctor playing the trilogic game. 'You see,' he said. 'It's quite easy when
you try and don't let yourself be distracted by your friends. You've been moving
along quite satisfactorily.' The Toymaker pointed over at the tally register. It now
recorded 690 moves. 'It's especially commendable since Dodo has chosen to sit
in the wrong chair.'

The Doctor's hand paused and remained stiffly in the air as if the owner was
looking over at the screen.

'Yes,' said the Toymaker. 'The freezing chair.'
Back in the throne room, Dodo, sitting on throne number two, let out a

shriek. Steven whipped around. 'Dodo, what are you doing?' he said. Steven
rushed across to her only to be met by some kind of invisible wall set around
the throne.

' Steven,' said Dodo, her teeth chattering. 'I'm cold all the way through.'
'Stand up,' said Steven urgently. 'I can't get through to you. There's some

sort of barrier here.'
'Help me,' said Dodo plaintively. 'I'm freezing. I can't move.'
'Stand up,' said Steven.
Dodo shook her head. 'I can't! I can't!'
'You must,' said Steven. 'There's some kind of wall around you. You must

try.'



'I think I'm turning to ice, Steven,' she said.
'Fight the cold, fight it! You must get out of that chair. Fight it, Dodo. Now!

Together - One -' Steven extended his hand. This time the barrier seemed to part
as their combined wills dissipated it. Steven's hand gripped Dodo's. Immediately
he felt an intense cold penetrating his hand and arm.

Dodo shook her head. 'It's no use, Steven. It will freeze you as well. Let go!'
'No,' said Steven. 'We must meet it together. Quick now - one pull!'
For onemoment it seemed as though the Toymaker's deadly chair was going

to win. Then, as Steven and Dodo exerted their last ounce of will and
determination, they countered the influence of the chair. With one great rush,
Dodo was ripped out of the chair and fell on top of Steven as they tumbled over
together.

'Oh,' said Dodo, 'thank you.' Her teeth were chattering. 'Thank you, you did
it.'

Steven, gasping for breath and rubbing his frozen hand, shook his head. 'No,
Dodo. We did it together. It was our combined wills. It shows what can happen
if we act together. We can beat this wicked man.'

'But, Steven,' said Dodo, rubbing back the circulation into her body, 'we've
lost, don't you see? They've probably found the lucky chair by now and with it,
the TARDIS.'



6. The Last Deadly Sister

The King and Queen were standing by chairs five and six with the Joker.
Behind them, Cyril was squatting on the ground eating another banana.

The King turned to the Joker. 'Now, my good fellow,' he said, 'we would be
very glad of your honest opinion. Which of these two is the better throne for me.'

The Joker gazed from the King to the Queen a little suspiciously. He hadn't
forgotten the remark about his being a poor fellow. Then he looked over at the
chairs. 'Well,' he said, 'That one isn't too bad.' He pointed to number six.

The King looked over at it and inspected it through his monocle. 'Number
six, eh? Good, good, but there's only one way to really test a chair, isn't there?
You can't tell much by just looking.'

The Joker looked suspiciously over at the pieces of broken doll on chair
number one. 'Poor fellow,' he muttered to himself. 'What did he mean?'

'Come on, Fool,' said the Queen impatiently. 'We haven't got all day.'
The Joker tried to manage a smile and waved his jester's wand. 'Wouldn't

you rather have a riddle?' he said. 'When is a door not a door?'
'Eh?' said the King and then laughed. 'He's got us there, m'dear.'
'Everyone knows that!' chimed in Cyril, his mouth full of banana. 'When

it's ajar.'
'Faugh! That's not even funny,' said the Queen. 'Are you going to sit in the

chair or not?' She was becoming more and more impatient with the Joker.
'Oh, all right,' agreed the Joker. He shuffled unwillingly over to the chair

and began to lower himself. Just then, Cyril gave a stifled giggle.
The Joker raised himself again and looked over suspiciously. 'What's he

laughing at?' he said.
The Queen turned warningly to Cyril. 'You're not laughing, are you?'
Cyril, still coping with a mouthful of banana, shook his head and then

spluttered, unable to contain his guffaw.
The Joker wearily raised his eyes. 'And they call me a fool,' he said.
'Come now,' said the King. 'Sit down, my dear fellow.'
But the Joker had had enough and moved away. 'Not on your life, sire,' he

said. He backed away to the passage. 'A joke is a joke, but this is too much. I'm
giving notice, you'll have to try out your own chairs.' He raised his jester's wand
in a final slightly rude gesture, and left.

After he had gone, the King and Queen looked after him astonished. Then
the King turned around to Cyril and raised his hand. Cyril scrambled to his feet.
'After him,' said the King. Cyril scurried out the door and the King turned back
to the Queen: 'Your son, m'dear.'

'More yours,' said the Queen. 'Anyway, what do we do now?'
'Nothing else for it,' said the King. 'You'll have to try, m'dear.'
The Queen drew herself up to her full height and looked at himmajestically.

'I?' she said.
'Oh,' said the King a little hastily, 'one of us, I mean. We'll have to draw

matches.' He brought out a box of matches and opened it up. 'Whoever gets the
short match sits in the chair,' he said.



The Queen shook her head firmly. 'I don't trust your matches,' she said. She
felt in the pocket of her gown and brought out a coin. 'We'll have to toss for it.'
She spun it up in the air. 'Heads,' she said.

The King nodded and waggled his finger. 'You forget, m'dear. I know that
coin - it's got two heads.'

The Queen shrugged her shoulders impatiently and put the coin away.
'Then, she said, 'we'll both sit on the chair together. So if we go ...'

'We go together, my love,' said the King.
In the first touch of real feeling displayed by the couple, the King offered

the Queen his arm. They walked over to chair number six and slowly sat down.
Almost at once, the chair collapsed entangling and imprisoning the King

and Queen in the wreckage, just as Steven and Dodo entered.
'Oh, the poor things,' said Dodo. 'Quick, Steven we must get them out of

there.'
'Right,' said Steven. 'But not just now.' He pointed over at chair number

five. 'Look,' he said.
Dodo caught on quickly. 'You mean?'
'That must be the one,' said Steven. He walked over to it and without

hesitating, sat down. The room darkened and a light came on from the cupboard
that wouldn't open. It now began to slide out as they watched until finally it
stood almost clear of the wall - an unmistakable police box. But was it the real
TARDIS?

'We've won!' exclaimed Dodo. 'That's got to be the TARDIS! As soon as
the Doctor wins his game, we can go. Oh, thank goodness Steven, we're safe,
we've won!'

She ran over to the TARDIS, took the handle and opened the door. Inside,
as Steven came to join her, they saw the interior of a perfectly ordinary police
telephone box. 'Oh no,' she said. 'It can't be, it's got to be the real one. Don't say
it's happened again.'

'This must be another of the Toymaker's TARDISes,' said Steven. He
stepped inside and started searching through it. 'Nothing,' he said. 'Absolutely
nothing. What now?'

'You know,' said Dodo, 'we didn't really sort out the last riddle about calling
the servants without voice.'

Steven nodded glumly. Both of them were deeply disappointed by the way
things had turned out after all their efforts. 'Let's try it again,' said Steven. 'You
never know.' He walked out of the box. 'Dolls, dolls wherever you are, come out.'

Suddenly behind him, came the ring of the telephone. The phone in the
police box was ringing. Steven turned and answered it while Dodo gazed
fearfully at the cupboard with the three dolls. But nothing seemed to be
happening. Steven picked up the phone a little tentatively and put it to his ear.
The unmistakable low drawling tones of the Toymaker came over the ear piece.

'You're doing better than I thought,' he said. 'But don't rest on your laurels.
The Doctor's succeeding even faster than you. Time and luck are running out.
Anyway,' he said, 'Here is the next clue: Hunt the key to fit the door That leads
out on the dancing floor; Then escape the rhythmic beat, Or you'll forever tap
your feet.'

There was a click and then a dial tone.



Steven turned around to Dodo. 'He's gone,' he said. He put the receiver back
and as he did so, the entire back wall of the police box swung open to reveal
a darkened passage. Steven turned back to Dodo. 'Look, Dodo,' he said, 'this is
obviously where the next game is.'

Dodo nodded and then turned back to look at the chairs. 'We still have to
release the King and Queen before we go. I rather liked them, Steven. They were
human in their own way.' She turned and walked back over towards the throne,
then stood still in sudden shock. Steven joined her. They looked at the throne.
Lying on the seat were two playing cards - the King and Queen of Hearts.

Steven turned back to Dodo and shrugged. 'I said that's all they were,' he
said. 'On to the next game. Come on.'

Dodo hung back for a moment, as Steven entered the passage. 'Let's try the
dolls once more,' she said. She then called out, 'Dolls, dolls wherever you are,
come out.' She paused for a moment and glanced around the room but again,
nothing happened. Steven called impatiently down the passageway and she
hurried after him.

As soon as the two of them made off down the passage, the lights began to
come on again in the room.

All four covered doors slid open and the three dolls started moving, slowly
and jerkily out of their cupboard and across the floor to the police box.



7. Enter Mrs Wiggs and Sergeant Rugg

The Toymaker stood facing the silent, invisible Doctor. 'I must congratulate
you on your choice of friends, Doctor. A very astute couple. Neither of my teams
has been able to beat them so far. They've earned a little amusement, I think.'

The Toymaker turned back to one of the doll's houses - the Victorian one.
'Now who have we here that will amuse them,' he said. 'Upstairs?' He wondered,
looking at the top rooms of the house. 'No, I think we shall find more worthy
opponents downstairs ... Perhaps in the kitchen.'

Steven and Dodo were now at the end of the long darkened passageway
which led from the second throne room. Steven was throwing his weight against
the large door that stood at the end. The door was Victorian, made of heavy
mahogany and panelled. Steven stood back and rubbed his bruised shoulder. 'It's
no use,' he said. 'I can't seem to get it open.'

'Oh, my goodness,' said Dodo behind him. 'Look there - the servants!' As
Steven turned around, he saw, advancing towards him with their slow stiff gait,
the three dolls.

'The servants without voice,' Dodo continued. 'They've come to our call.'
Dodo, frightened, pressed back against Steven. 'They scare me,' she said.
Steven's voice was a trifle nervous. 'They're only dolls.'
'We called them,' said Dodo. 'Perhaps we can make them go back-to their

cupboard.' She called out as the dolls continued their slow inexorable advance
towards them. 'Dolls,' she said, 'go back! Go back to your cupboard!'

The dolls still continued to stalk down the corridor towards them.
Steven moved forward. 'I'll stop them,' he said squaring his powerful

shoulders. But Dodo grasped his arm.
'Don't, Steven,' said Dodo. 'You don't know what they might do. After all,

we helped destroy their companions, the other dolls.'
'Then perhaps we can edge past them,' said Steven.
As if reading his mind, the three dolls spread out and stopped, completely

blocking the passageway.
'We can't get past them now,' said Dodo anxiously.
'But they've stopped,' said Steven. 'I'm going to rush them, knock them over.

You follow me. We'll get past them.' Steven hunched his shoulders and moved
back to get a good run at the dolls. As he moved back, the solid kitchen door
swung silently open behind him and he backed into it without noticing.

'Be careful, Steven,' cried Dodo. She turned around and noticed the open
door. 'Look!' She grasped his arm, throwing him slightly off balance.

Steven fell back against the wall. 'What did you do that for?' He turned and
saw the open door. 'Oh, good heavens,' he said.

Dodo moved forward into the kitchen, Steven cautiously following her.
'Careful,' he warned. 'It could be a trap.'

The kitchen they moved into was an exact replica of the Toymaker's doll
kitchen with a large Welsh dresser housing gleaming Willow pattern cups and
plates, and a long deal topped table complete with mixing bowls, rolling pin and
pastry board.



On one side, was a long deep ceramic sink with a wooden draining board;
on the other, a large coal burning range with oven and hobs on which a variety
of saucepans were simmering.

'A trap.' The voice came from behind them, deep, mellow and fruity. 'A
trap, in here, in Mrs Wiggs' kitchen! You'll have to watch your language, young
fellow.'

Steven and Dodo wheeled around to see standing by the table, a red-faced,
mustachioed, somewhat portly middle-aged man, smartly dressed in a red
uniform with white breaches and crossed belts over his chest which Steven, who
studied and liked reading books about military history, was quick to recognise
as a sergeant's uniform from the time of the Napoleonic Wars.

'Yes,' said another voice. They turned to find a comfortably plump, middle-
aged woman with a mop cap perched on her head, and a red mottled face, the
result of standing over too many hot stoves. She spoke with a cockney accent.
'What do you want in my kitchen?' she asked.

Dodo, pleased to see somebody who looked almost normal - after the
clowns and the playing cards, stepped forward. 'We're looking for the next game.
Perhaps you can help us? The clue goes:

Hunt the key to fit the door, That leads out on the dancing floor; Then escape
the rhythmic beat, Or you'll forever tap your feet.'

'Well,' said Mrs Wiggs (for that was her name), 'only dancing floor I knows
of is through there.' She pointed off at the other end of the kitchen where there
was an old oak door with a large lock and keyhole.

'Oh, thank you,' said Dodo. She started walking across to the door while
Steven stayed behind, looking curiously around the kitchen.

The Sergeant drew himself up to his full height. 'Right then, young fella
m'lad. No loitering. Pick your feet up. Hup two, three, four; hup two, three, four.'

Steven turned around to him contemptuously. 'You look like a toy soldier
to me. Why don't you go back to your box?'

'What's that?' the Sergeant raised his hand and twisted one of his long
moustaches. 'You young whipper snapper! I'll, I'll -'

Steven turned on him again. 'You'll what?' he said.
'Well,' said the Sergeant, backing away. 'I'll uh -You need a good hiding,

m'lad!'
After all he'd been through, Steven was spoiling for a fight. 'Who's going

to give it to me?' he said. The Sergeant backed away again and Mrs Wiggs came
forward.

'No fisticuffs in my nice clean kitchen, Sergeant,' she warned.
The Sergeant nodded. 'Just as well you spoke, Cook.
No telling what I might have done to him if you hadn't stopped me.'
MrsWiggs looked at him fondly. 'You're a terrible man when you're roused,

Sergeant.'
The Sergeant twirled his moustache again; his eyes were twinkling. 'Army

training, Cook. Six years with the Iron Duke.'
Dodo had been trying the door handlewithout success, then she turned back.

'The door seems to be locked. But I'm sure we must get through here. That's what
the clue says. The TARDIS must be out on the dance floor.'



Steven came over, tried the door, then kicked it. 'How can the Toymaker
expect us to play his crazy games if he locks all his doors!'

The Sergeant lowered his voice and nudged Mrs Wiggs. 'Like to have him
in my mob,' he said. 'Just give me a week. I'll make a man of him.'

'What?' Steven turned back threateningly.
'Uh,' said the Sergeant. 'Well, like, not that he needs making a man of. I'm

sure he's that already - but just to sharpen him up a bit, like.'
'Now,' said Steven, 'I'm warning you.' He moved towards the Sergeant.
Dodo came forward and took his arm, smiling at him. 'Really, Steven,' she

said laughing, 'if they're not real, how can you lose your temper with them?'
Steven looked puzzled and scratched his head. 'You can't have it both ways,

you know,' said Dodo.
'All right,' said Steven. 'We'll just ignore them. They're obviously sent to

get my goat. Well, where do we go from here? We're stuck.'
The Sergeant came over to Dodo and looked her over. 'The Iron Duke

wouldn't have been stuck over a little thing like that,' he said.
Steven gritted his teeth and turned to Dodo. 'Okay, Dodo, it's your turn.'
Dodo turned round and smiled at the Sergeant. 'What would the Iron Duke

have done?' she said.
The Sergeant smiled a little enigmatically. 'Have had another look at the

riddle, I expect,' he said.
'The riddle ...' said Dodo. She thought for a moment. 'Then escape the

rhythmic beat, or you'll forever tap your feet.'
'Naw,' said Mrs Wiggs. 'The first bits, ducks.'
'Hunt the key to fit the door - Steven,' she said, 'that's it!'
Steven looked blank for a moment. 'Don't you see?' said Dodo. 'The game is

Hunt The Thimble. Only instead of a thimble, it must be a door key. She looked
over at the door. 'And a rather large one at that.'

'Hmm,' Steven nodded slowly in agreement. 'I see,' he said. 'The problem
is, where do we start looking?' They glanced around the large over-furnished
Victorian kitchen with its pots, pans, canisters, shelves and dishes.

Dodo walked over to the range and then gave a start as she noticed
something she hadn't seen before. In a large chair, to the right of the range, was
a sleeping kitchen boy, dressed in a chefs hat, rather grubby white coat and
trousers.

'Steven,' she said, 'look at this fellow.'
'That's my kitchen boy,' saidMrsWiggs, 'Lazy good-for-nothing. He spends

all his time sleeping and eating.'
'But don't you think,' said Dodo to Steven, 'that he looks rather like Cyril?'
Steven glanced down at the sleeping boy and nodded. 'Come to think of it

he does. But then, all the Toymaker's creations look alike to me. We'd better get
a move on,' he said.

He looked up over the door to where the inevitable robot now stood. 'Look,'
he said. On the screen the number read 813. 'We must find the TARDIS before
the Doctor reaches 1023. We haven't long,' said Steven. He turned to the range
and lifted up one of the saucepans. The lid was hot; he dropped it with a cry.
'Ow!' he said.



'Comes from a 'ot place, don't it?' said Mrs Wiggs. 'What do you expect?
Now come away from me pans.'

'We've got to find the key to that door,' said Dodo.
'You won't find it there,' said Mrs Wiggs.
'How do you know?' said Dodo.
The Sergeant stepped forward once more to defend the cook:' 'Cause, Mrs

Wiggs always knows what's best. That's why, young lady.'
Steven had a sudden idea, went over to the sleeping boy and started lifting

him up to see if the key was perhaps underneath where he was lying. Despite the
boy's weight, Steven managed to lift him clear of the chair and looked. There
was no key there. He put him back.

Dodo took one more look around the kitchen, and decided on another tack.
She turned to the Sergeant, went up to him and smiled her most beguiling smile.
'You'll help us find the key,' she said. 'Won't you?'

'Hmm,' the Sergeant twirled his moustache. 'Well, I dunno.'
'Oh,' said Dodo. 'You look so marvellous in that uniform. You must be very

brave.'
'Well, I do my duty, gel.'
'Then you'll help us,' said Dodo. 'For my sake.' She put her hand on the

Sergeant's chest and opened her eyes wide.
The Sergeant gazed down at her. Soldiers could never resist the fair sex, as

he would have put it. 'All right, gel,' he said. 'For you mind.' He stuck his thumb
over his shoulder at Steven. 'Not for 'im.'

Dodo nodded eagerly. 'Where do you suggest we start looking?'
'Hm,' said the Sergeant. 'Let's see. How 'bout the old dresser here?'
Meanwhile Mrs Wiggs was busy at the table making pastry and keeping an

eye on this exchange with growing disfavour. 'You watch what you do with my
dresser,' she said a little jealously.

Disregarding her, Dodo opened a drawer and started rummaging around
the knives and forks inside. The Sergeant opened another and started throwing
tablecloths and cloth napkins out on the floor.

Steven, meanwhile, took a chair over, stood on it and started examining
the inside of a large cuckoo clock, just as it struck. The cuckoo came out and
narrowly missed hitting him on the nose. Steven fell back off the chair.

'Are you all right?' called Dodo. Then as Steven started getting to his feet,
Dodo couldn't resist laughing, as she always did at Steven's mishaps. He always
looked so comically protective of his dignity.

"ere, what do you thinks this place is, a bloomin' fairground?' Mrs Wiggs
was outraged as she saw Sergeant Rugg empty out another drawer of linen. 'You
put all of that back in the drawer, just as it was!'

The Sergeant turned back and stood to attention. 'Just 'elping the young
lady, Mrs Wiggs.' He turned back to Dodo. 'What's your name m'gel?'

Dodo flashed him a smile. 'Dodo,' she said. 'Dodo,' said the Sergeant. 'What
a lovely name. Dodo. I like that, I do.'

'Well,' said MrsWiggs crossly, 'go and like it somewhere else and take your
friends with you.'

The Sergeant turned back towards the cook a little patronisingly. 'Come
now, Mrs Wiggs. The young gel's gone and been and lost her key, ain't she?'



'Well,' said Mrs Wiggs, 'she won't find it 'ere.' She grabbed the rolling pin
and started rolling up her sleeves.

Steven looked at Dodo and shrugged. 'Take no notice of it, Dodo. She's sent
by the Toymaker to put us off. It's a sign we're getting warm.'

He started to crawl under the table to see if the key was there. Getting angry
and more red in the face than ever, MrsWigg looked from Steven to Dodo, but as
neither of them seemed to be taking the slightest notice of her, she put down her
roller and went back to her pastry board and started preparing a pie for the oven.

Dodo walked over to one of the cupboards on the dresser and looked inside.
She saw a collection of Victorian china: a cow creamer, a swan-shaped butter
dish, a china cheese cover made in the shape of a cottage and a stack of dessert
plates with Victorian nursery rhymes painted on the rims. She started to search
among the china for the key.

By the tableMrsWiggs suddenly gave a little scream, drew back and looked
under. 'Ey,' she said to Steven, 'that was my foot you got hold of. Come out from
under there!'

Steven crawled out from under the table. He looked over at Dodo and shook
his head. 'It's not under there,' he said. 'Any luck?'

Dodo finished examining the china, turned back and closed the cupboard.
'No,' she said. 'I'll look among the plates up there,' she said, nodding up to the
shelves at the top of the dresser. She turned and started dragging her chair over.

'Now don't you get up there, m'gel,' said the Sergeant. 'You'll fall down and
break a leg. Here, let me look for you.'

Dodo, touched by this unexpected courtesy and warming to being treated
like a woman at last, said, 'It's very kind of you.'

The Sergeant climbed up on the chair. 'Not at all, ma'am,' he said. He
wavered for a moment and nearly fell.

Mrs Wiggs glared up at him. 'What do you think you're doing up there,
Sergeant.?'

'Now,' said the Sergeant. 'Don't you fret, cookie,' he said. He swayed
alarmingly and grabbed the shelf for balance. 'I'll be all right.'

'I'm not worried about you,' said Mrs Wiggs. 'It's my china.' As she spoke,
the Sergeant pulled a plate out to look behind it. It fell down to the floor and
broke. Mrs Wiggs gave a little scream. 'Me best plates! Come down at once!'

'Only a little accident, Mrs Wiggs,' said the Sergeant with dignity.
Mrs Wiggs put her hands on her hips and glared up at him. 'Accident!' she

said. 'That was no accident, Sergeant. You threw that plate down deliberate like!'
The Sergeant's face grew solemn. 'I hope as you're not calling me a liar, Mrs

Wiggs!' Another plate came crashing down on the floor.
'That,' said Mrs Wiggs ironically, 'was another accident, I suppose.'
The Sergeant changed hands and a few more plates came down. Dodo

looked from one to the other, nervous at having started a fight between them.
'Perhaps you'd better come down. Sergeant?' she suggested.

'Not at all, gel, I'm perfectly all right.' Three more plates cascaded down.
The kitchen boy began to stir.

'I'm warnin' you, Sergeant Rugg, come down here this instant!' ordered Mrs
Wiggs.



The Sergeant's back became ever more ram-rod straight. 'Soldiers don't take
orders from civilians, Cook. Now you just pipe down.'

This was the final straw as far as Mrs Wiggs was concerned. 'Pipe down
yourself, you great lump!' she said furiously. 'Call yourself a soldier! You'd run
away from a pussy cat!'

The Sergeant glared back at her. 'You didn't ought to have said that, Cook.'
He deliberately scooped off threemore plates, one of them hitting the kitchen boy
on the head as it fell. Coming awake with a start, the boy dived below the table.

'You clumsy brute,' said Mrs Wiggs.
'Please, please,' said Dodo very distressed by what was going on. 'Stop, it's

all my fault.'
Steven turned back from examining the big copper boiler in the corner.

'Ignore them,' he said. 'It's being done to prevent us from finding the key. They
don't exist, remember - it's not real.' Just then, a plate flung by the Sergeant hit
him on the head. 'Oww!' he called.

Dodo pulled him back out of the firing line. 'Are you sure about that?' she
questioned.

Steven rubbed his head. 'That certainly felt real enough,' he said. 'Do you
suppose there is a key?We've looked everywhere, haven't we?We looked around
the kitchen.'

By now a fusilade of missiles was flying back and forth across the kitchen,
with Mrs Wiggs picking up the pastry she had been working on and flinging it
at the Sergeant who, in turn, was bombarding her with plates. The once orderly
kitchen was now a mess of broken crockery, flour and pastry.

Taking advantage of the cook's distraction, the kitchen boy reached up and
grabbed a jar of sultanas and then starting eating under the table.

'Oh please, stop, stop!' cried Dodo. 'You've thrown everything there is to
throw. Can't you both call a truce?'

'Not everything!' Mrs Wiggs picked up a bag of flour and threw it. It burst
like a bomb on the Sergeant's shoulder covering him with white powder. 'He's
broken all of me best china!' said Mrs Wiggs.

'I'm sure he'll apologise,' said Dodo.
The Sergeant shook his head and started brushing the flour off. 'Soldiers

never apologise,' he said.
Dodo went over to him and, taking a whisk, began to help him brush the

white flour from his red uniform. 'But a gentleman would always apologise to
a lady,' she said.

'Garn,' came the voice of Mrs Wiggs behind them. 'Who told ya soldiers
were gentlemen?'

'Sergeant Rugg is,' said Dodo. 'I'm sure of that.'
The Sergeant stiffened again, and after a pause turned around and bowed to

the cook as she climbed off her chair. 'I apologise,' he said.
Dodo turned back to Mrs Wiggs. 'Now will you accept his apology?'
Mrs Wiggs scowled sulkily for a moment and then said, 'Well, all right, but

he'll have to pay for me china.'
'Hmm?' the Sergeant reddened again. 'Pay for the china?' He turned toDodo.

'You see now why soldiers never apologise? Give the old trout an inch and -'



'Old trout VMrsWiggs picked up a broom beside the stove and started after
the Sergeant who backed away around the table.

'Now Mrs Wiggs,' he said, 'put that down!'
Mrs Wiggs swept the broom at his legs and as he jumped back, Cyril got

it on the head. Crawling out from under the kitchen table still clutching the
sultanas, Cyril made for the far wall and crept along it heading for the safety of
the walk-in pantry.

Steven followed him with his eyes. 'Hey!' he called to him. 'Just a minute,
where do you think you're going.'

The kitchen boy put his tongue out. 'Mind your own business,' he said.
With sudden intuition, Steven strode across to him. 'I think you knowwhere

the key is.' Behind them, the cook had the Sergeant bottled in the corner of the
room and was belabouring himwith the broom despite Dodo's efforts to stop her.

The kitchen boy slowly extended the jar of sultanas towards Steven who
took them. 'Now we're getting somewhere.' He put his hand in the jar, feeling
around through the sultanas, but there was no key. He tried again - same result.
Finally, he dumped them on the floor in disgust.

Meanwhile, the kitchen boy had reached the safety of the pantry. As Steven
turned back to him, he slipped inside and shut the door. 'Hey, come out of there.'
Steven ran to the door of the pantry and shook it, but the boy had managed to
lock himself inside.

'Please don't,' Dodo said to the cook. 'I'm sure you'll hurt him with that
broom.'

The Sergeant moved around to the other side of the table out of range and
picked up the pie Mrs Wiggs was preparing for the cupboard. 'If she does, this
pie gets hurt as well,' he threatened.

'Put me pie down!' said Mrs Wiggs demandingly.
'Put that broom down then!' cried the Sergeant. Mrs Wiggs made a sudden

dash around the table, sweeping the broom at the Sergeant's legs. He jumped up
on one of the kitchen chairs, holding the pie high above his head.

With a sudden flash of intuition, Dodo turned and clutched Steven's arm.
'Steven,' she said. 'That's the only place we haven't looked!'

'Where?' said Steven.
'The pie,' said Dodo.
'I see what you mean.' Steven picked up the second broom and went to the

other end of the table.
He turned to MrsWiggs. 'I'll help you,' he said. 'I'll swipe him from behind.'
The Sergeant turned around in alarm, looking at this new enemy that

appeared. 'Not you too!' he said.
AsMrsWiggs swung her broom at him from the front, the Sergeant jumped

back and Steven, swinging from the rear, knocked the pie out of his hands. It
landed on the floor beside Dodo.

Dodo quickly picked the pie up and ripped the crust off. There inside was
a large Victorian key. She showed it to Steven.

'I've got it! This must be the key.'
Steven ran over and grabbed it from her. 'Right,' he said. 'Quick, Dodo.' He

ran to the door followed by Dodo and thrust the key in the lock. The door creaked
open and as it did so, they could hear the sound of waltz music.



Dodo turned around. 'Thank you, Sergeant,' she said. 'You really are a true
gentleman.' She turned to Mrs Wiggs. 'And sorry about your kitchen,' she said.

With the finding of the key, the Sergeant and Mrs Wiggs had stopped
fighting and stood looking at them.

Steven and Dodo disappeared. In their place there slowly materialised the
tall dark form of the Toymaker.

He turned around to the Sergeant and the Cook who cowered away from
him. 'Wretched pair,' he said. 'I give you a chance for freedom and this is all you
can do with it. Look at the kitchen.'

The Sergeant came to attention and saluted. 'It's my fault,' said the Sergeant
gallantly. 'Not hers.'

The Toymaker sneered at him. 'Such gallantry,' he said. 'From a mere doll!
And listen to me both of you.

Tidy yourselves up and get out on that dance floor. At the far end is the
TARDIS. Steven and Dodo must be prevented from getting to it at all costs.
Do you understand? Fail me and I'll break you like these plates.' The Toymaker
turned, lifted the remaining plate off the dresser and smashed it on the table.

Frightened, the Sergeant and the cook nodded and started brushing their
clothes, preparing for the dance.

8 The Ballroom
Steven and Dodo stepped out into a room that was in complete contrast to

the two previous ones. This roomwas decorated as an old-fashioned ballroom. A
huge chandelier slowly turned, flashing vari-coloured lights across a triangular
dance floor of beautifully polished parquet wood. The music was gentle and
soothing: old time waltzes, quick steps and fox trots. On the dance floor, three
ballerina dolls, one male and two females, were doing a slow graceful dance
number. Dodo and Steven stopped to watch.

The dance ended, the dolls took their bows to Dodo's applause, and then
relapsed stiffly to a mannequin-like position. Steven, who had been watching the
dancing a little impatiently, moved forward to step on the wooden dance floor
but Dodo stopped him.

'Be careful,' she said. 'It may be dangerous - like the chairs.'
'There's no other way to get to the TARDIS,' said Steven.
Dodo shook her head. 'Remember what we've been through. It can't be that

simple, can it? There must be a catch to it somewhere.' She went on to quote the
riddle. 'Then escape the rhythmic beat, or you'll forever tap your feet. What do
you suppose that means?' For answer Steven cautiously stretched his hand over
the dance floor. A slow waltz started up. He pulled his hand back. The music
stopped.

'Strange,' said Dodo. She put her hand over the floor and the same thing
occurred. 'I can do it too,' she said.

Steven shook his head anxiously. 'The Doctor's game won't wait for us.
We'll just have to take a chance.' As he spoke, from behind through the
passageway, Sergeant Rugg and Mrs Wiggs emerged. Their clothes were now
clean and beautifully fresh and pressed. Theywalked a little stiffly, even proudly.

'Hello,' said Dodo. 'You've made it up then.'
The Sergeant drew himself up to his full height once again. 'Mrs Wiggs has

too warm a heart to keep a quarrel going.'



Mrs Wiggs giggled like a young girl. 'The Sergeant is going to take me to
the ball.'

'The ball?' queried Dodo.
'Right in 'ere gel,' said the Sergeant. 'There's no lack of partners as you

see.' He pointed over to the waiting dolls. 'They never get tired of dancing, them
dollies.'

Steven, meanwhile, had been walking around the edge of the dance floor.
The only way to reach the TARDIS was by crossing it. Without waiting further,
Steven started striding across the floor. The music started. To his horror, Steven
suddenly found himself dancing around to the steps of a Viennese waltz.

'It's no time for a dance, Steven,' said Dodo, laughing.
Steven looked back, his face stricken: 'I can't help myself.' Steven tried to

get toward the edge of the floor, but every time he got near, he found himself
whisked away as though he were on some invisible, moving turntable.

'Look out!' said Dodo anxiously. She pointed behind Steven and as he
twirled around, he saw the three dolls move mechanically towards him.

The scene on the dance floor was being watched by the Toymaker in his
private office. The tally recorder now read number 876 and the Doctor's hand
was still visible, moving the counters from one place to another.

'You're doing very well, Doctor,' said the Toymaker. 'Let's hope you haven't
made a mistake. But you'll find that out when you reach your 1023rd move.'

The Toymaker waved his hand lazily towards the screen. 'I see that Steven
has taken some time off from the quest to go dancing.'

The hand stopped as if the invisible Doctor was watching the screen. 'Keep
on playing,' said the Toymaker. 'Keep on playing.'

One of the ballerina dolls approached Steven, grabbed him around the waist
and held his hand. It started to dance with him.

'Get away from it,' said Dodo. 'You must. The riddle warned us that if you
started dancing it would be forever.'

Steven shook his head, sweat pouring from his brow. 'I can't,' he said. 'It's
holding me here like steel! Don't come on to the floor, Dodo. Get back.'

'But then we can't reach the TARDIS,' said Dodo anxiously.
'Perhaps I'll be able to move the doll nearer to it,' he said.
And even as he spoke, the doll guided Steven's feet effortlessly - further

away from the TARDIS.
The Sergeant looked over at them: 'Not a bad dancer. For a civilian that is!

And not a bad-looking couple.'
Mrs Wiggs turned to Dodo. 'He'd make a nicer partner for you, ducks.'
Dodo came to a sudden resolution. 'I'm going to try and reach the TARDIS,'

she said. She jumped onto the dance floor and at once, she found herself dancing
too.

Now the rhythm changed to a fast beat number. The doll disengaged Steven
and started gyrating in front of him and Steven found himself tossing and turning
on the dance floor to some disco beat. He turned and to his horror saw Dodo also
on the floor dancing opposite a male ballet dancer doll. 'What are you doing?'
he cried. 'Get away Dodo. Get back.'

Dodo shook her head. 'I can't,' she said.



Standing beside the dance floor, the Sergeant turned to Mrs Wiggs. 'Now
we got them both dancing,' he said. 'What was it the Toymaker wanted us to do?'

Mrs Wiggs pointed over to the TARDIS: 'Reach that big cupboard before
them.'

'And what about that other doll?' asked the Sergeant.
'Well, that's the game, ducks, ain't it? You dance with 'er and I'll run for

the cupboard.'
'Begging your pardon, mum. This is men's work. You dance and I'll run.'

Mrs Wiggs shook her head obstinately. The Sergeant continued. 'To be quite
frank with you, missus, soldiers don't dance well, officers perhaps, but never
sergeants! Now, why don't you try that floor?'

A little reluctantly, Mrs Wiggs stepped onto the dance floor and, as she did,
the dolls changed partners. Steven's doll went to dance with Dodo; Dodo's doll
went to dancewithMrsWiggs; and the third doll came over to dancewith Steven.

Steven, this time swept up in a 1920s tango rhythm and holding his partner
around the waist, called to Dodo. 'Try and keep near me,' he said.

'Why?' said Dodo.
Steven shook his head at her. 'Tell you later.'
Mrs Wiggs, being swept around by her doll in long sweeping tango steps,

was getting out of breath. 'I can't keep this up for long Sergeant,' she said. 'Go
on, run for the cupboard.'

The Sergeant, who seemed reluctant to step on the dance floor, braced
himself. 'Just on my way, Mrs W,' he said. He took a big stride onto the dance
floor only to find that his feet weren't his own. He started to dance too. The music
changed again - this time it was a snappy fox trot of the 1930s.

Once again the dolls changed partners. One of the ballerinas attached herself
to the Sergeant. The male doll left Mrs Wiggs and took Dodo in his arms and
Steven's doll approached Mrs Wiggs and started dancing. Just as Steven had
hoped, he found himself unattached.

'Help,' said the Sergeant. 'What's happening?'
'I'm surprised at you, Sergeant Rugg,' said MrsWiggs. 'Put that hussy down

and get to the cupboard.'
'I can't!' shouted the Sergeant.
Meanwhile, Steven said to Dodo. 'Keep going. Try to get as near as you can

to the TARDIS. We're almost there, now concentrate. Now! Quick!'
By a great effort of will, Steven managed to steer himself as close as he

could to the TARDIS. He reached forward, grabbed the door, pulled it open,
turned, and as Dodo and her partner came past, grabbed her by the arm and
pulled. Both of them shot inside and the door shut behind them.

For a moment, Dodo and Steven were too busy trying to catch their breath
to take in their surroundings. Then they realised that they were in yet another
police box.

'Another fake! I wonder how many of these things the Toy maker has.'
'Far too many,' said Dodo. I'm beginning to wonder if we'll ever find the

real one at all.'
'Of course we will,' said Steven. 'Don't lose heart. We've been through too

much.'



'I wonder if we'll ever see the sergeant and the cook again. They were rather
nice you know,' said Dodo.

Steven shook his head in disbelief. 'You still believe in these creations of
the Toymaker, don't you?' he said. 'You can't see that they are just phantoms -
things created in his mind.'

'If that's so,' said Dodo. 'Why do they lose to us? And always through
something silly and, yes, human, and in a way rather touching.'

Steven shook his head puzzled. 'I don't know,' he said. 'Perhaps they get
out of his control.'

'There,' she said. Dodo always liked winning the argument when she could.
'That's what I meant.'

'Come again?' said Steven.
'He can bring them to life,' she explained. 'But they have wills and minds

of their own. I'll never be able to look at a doll or a playing card again with an
easy mind. They really live a secret life.'

Steven looked at her with concern as though she had flipped her lid this
time, as he would have put it. 'We'd better get you out of this - and quickly.'

'What do you mean?' said Dodo, a bit annoyed.
'This place is beginning to get to you, isn't it?'
'Rubbish,' said Dodo, really annoyed now. 'Just because you can't see ...'
'Oh, come on,' said Steven. 'We'd better find the next clue.'
Back in the study, the Toymaker was watching the screen. He saw the

Sergeant and Mrs Wiggs, now dancing together, get smaller and smaller,
reverting to their doll's size. The Toymaker waved his arm angrily and the screen
became blank. He then turned to the Doctor.

'You dare to laugh at me, do you, Doctor? You forget I can see you when
no-one else can. You laugh too soon. The game is not yet over - either for you
or your clever friends. They still have another game or two to play, and they
mustn't win this next game.'

The Toymaker strode quickly over to the doll's house and surveyed a small
row of dolls. There were the clowns, the playing cards, and the Sergeant and
Cook dolls laid out.

'I was foolish to trust you to play my games,' said the Toymaker. He turned
and opened a chest and threw the dolls inside carelessly. 'Clowns! Playing cards!
Nursery characters! All too human and too kind. No. This time I must find a
more deadly opponent.' He turned around and, from the doll's house, brought
out the figure of a round, rather fat, English schoolboy in school uniform -cap,
blazer, short trousers, long socks and leather shoes.

He held it up and looked at it. 'The most deadly opponent of all,' he said,
'because he appears the most innocent. A fat, jolly, school boy: who could
suspect him? My friend Cyril!' He laughed. 'I wonder what your friends will
make of him, Doctor?'

He looked over at the tally recorder which now registered 899. As he
watched, it clicked on to 900. 'You only have 123 moves to go, Doctor,' he said.
'I think we've got you this time.'

Back in the fake TARDIS, Steven was beginning to get frustrated. 'Can you
see any way out of this?' he asked. 'We can't go back in on the dance floor.' He
started to push at one of the walls but nothing happened.



'What do you think that is?' said Dodo. She pointed to one of the three walls
on which was marked a large arrow pointing up to the roof of the police box.
The words Start Here were written alongside the arrow. Steven reached up and
started examining the wall on which the arrow was painted. Further up, there
was a piece of paper at the tip of the arrow. He reached up and got it.

'This must be the next riddle,' he said. As soon as he had ripped the paper off
the wall, the wall slowly descended until it was flat upon the ground and revealed
a passageway - dark at the entrance but with a distant glimmer of light at the end.

'I don't like the look of it,' said Steven.
'Nevertheless,' said Dodo, 'we'd better go down there.'
'Hold on,' said Steven. 'Just a minute. Let's see what this says.' He opened

up the piece of paper and read the words written on it: Lady luck will show the
way; win the game, or here you'll stay.

'That's much shorter than the others were,' said Dodo.
'That doesn't mean it will be any easier,' said Steven. 'Come on.' He started

to lead the way down the passage. As they walked down towards the end, the
light became gradually brighter and brighter until it almost dazzled them.

'I can hardly see,' said Dodo.
'Wait a for a minute before we enter this,' said Steven.
Dodo slowly opened her eyes against the glare, then screamed. There was

a strange figure standing in front of them.
Cryil was standing in school boy's uniform but with the knave's hat on. As

they watched, he took it off, then put on the kitchen boy's chefs hat. Then he
took the chefs hat off and replaced it with a school cap. He leered at them out
of the corner of his mouth.

'Who are you?' said Steven. 'We've seen you before, haven't we?'
'I'm Cyril. I was the Knave and the kitchen boy, so we're old friends, aren't

we? Huh, I had you that time. Did I scare you?'
'You certainly did, Cyril,' said Dodo indignantly.
'Let's be friends,' said Cyril. He offered his gloved hand to Steven who

shook it and jumped back.
'Oh!' cried Steven. He shook his hand. 'I got a shock. He must have some

sort of a electrical device there.' Cyril's fat body was shaking with laughter.
'You should see your face,' said Cyril.
'You'll feel my hand in a moment,' said Steven. 'What have you got there?'

he grabbed Cyril's arm and dragged back his sleeve to reveal two wires and a
small battery strapped to his wrist.

'I say,' said Cyril. 'Careful! I'll show you.' He stripped his glove off and
showed the rubber-backed electrode which gave Steven the shock.

'Take that thing off,' said Steven. Cyril took the glove off and untaped the
battery on his wrist.

'There you are,' said Cyril.
'Have you any more of these silly schoolboy jokes on you?' queried Steven.
Cyril looked sulky. 'No,' he said. 'I don't know why you're taking on like

this. I've come to be friends with you.'
'Charming way you have to make friends,' said Steven.
Dodo was always ready to be sympathetic, 'He didn't mean any harm,' she

said. 'Did you?'



Cyril nodded eagerly. 'Oh no,' he said. He pulled a somewhat grubby bag
of sweets from his pocket and offered them to her. 'Have one of these,' he said.

Dodo shook her head. 'No, thanks,' she said.
'Oh go on,' he said. 'They're quite harmless. They're humbugs.' Again, Dodo

shook her head but Steven nudged her.
'Take them, Dodo, or we'll be here all day.' Dodo took the sweets and put

them away in her pocket.
'Thank you,' said Cyril. 'If I eat any more, I'll be sick, I suspect.' He turned

to Steven. 'You're my hero, you know,' he said. 'I want to grow up just like you.'
'When you grow up?' said Steven puzzled. Cyril nodded his head. 'You look

pretty grown up already to me.'
Dodo, meanwhile, had been looking off at the Doctor's tally screen.

'Steven!' she interjected. 'The Doctor's reached move 902.'
Steven nodded. 'We'd better hurry then. Where's the game we have to play?'

he asked Cyril.
'Oh, right over there,' said Cyril. 'You won't have such an easy time of it for

your next game, because you're going to be playing against me.'
He turned to face them and for a moment, his round face with big blue eyes

showed an expression of almost devilish cunning that made Steven and Dodo
draw back from him.



9. The Final Test

'It looks like a huge pinball machine,' said Dodo excitedly. The reason for
the glare as they had come out of the dark passage was now apparent. They
were confronted by a room in which the ceiling, the walls and the floor were
illuminated from behind. On the lighted floor was a series of triangles like the
ones found on arcade pinball machines. These were also lighted up in different
colours. The triangles were numbered one to fourteen. Triangle fourteen was
much bigger than the others and had the word Home flashing on the top. The
numbered triangles led in a twisting snake-like fashion around the room before
ending upon the home triangle.

'This looks much easier than the other games,' said Dodo. She turned to
Cyril. For answer, Cyril bent down and opened up a school satchel he had left
lying on the floor. From the satchel he brought a large dice and a dice shaker,
placing them on the floor near the first triangle marked Start.

'Here's the dice,' said Cyril. 'When it's your turn to move, throw it and the
number will show on the indicator over there.' Cyril pointed over to the back of
the room where there was yet another TARDIS. Beside it, was a large cylinder,
like a barber's pole with bright red, white and blue stripes. It was turning slowly
and, as it turned, a message formed on the side. The riddle became visible. Lady
Luck will show the way, win the game, or here you'll stay.

'You move forward the same number of triangles as the number shown on
the dice. It's really very simple: the first one to reach triangle fourteen' - he
pointed over to the Home triangle, - is the winner!'

'It's almost too easy,' said Steven. 'What's the catch?'
'No catch,' said Cyril, looking blandly from one to the other with his large,

blue eyes. 'First home is the winner.'
'I still don't understand.' Steven shook his head. 'That gives us a two to one

chance over you.'
'Oh,' said Cyril. His blue eyes grew even wider and more deceptively

innocent-looking. 'Why, so it does. But there it is. I shall just have to put up with
it, won't I? We shall all jump from one triangle to another and the one who gets
there, Home, is the winner.'

'Why jump?' asked Steven. 'Why can't we just walk on the floor from one
triangle to another?'

'Oh,' said Cyril. 'Of course, you can walk if you like, but I shouldn't if I
were you.'

'Why not?' asked Dodo.
'Because after triangle number four all the area between the spaces is

electrified and you'll be killed.' Cyril's face creased into an entirely cherubic little
smile as his eyes flicked from Dodo to Steven.

In the Toymaker's private office, the Toymaker, with his hands folded
mandarin style, was gloating to the Doctor. 'I don't think your friends will do so
well now, Doctor. Cyril hates to lose, so he makes sure he never does.'

The Doctor's hand hesitated. Above them the tally recorder flashed the
move 905.



'Oh, please don't stop playing,' said the Toy maker. 'You're so near the end
now. Soon we'll discover whether or not you got the sequence right.'

'Right now you need help.' The Toymaker raised his voice to the high-
pitched sound he used to give commands to the trilogic game. 'Go from move
930.' Immediately there was a clicking noise and the pieces started flying across
the board of their own volition until the tally indicator clicked up to 930.

'There,' said the Toymaker. 'At this rate, you'll finish long before Dodo and
Steven reach the TARDIS. And you'll have to stay here. You know, your two
friends will make such charming dolls. Look over here.'

The Toymaker walked over to the doll's house and opened it. 'Look, two
chairs, all ready and waiting for them. And here, I've had some special costumes
made for when they play games.' The Toymaker opened a tiny wardrobe and
pulled out two intricately crafted Victorian children's suits. 'They'll be
companions for Cyril. The poor boy gets very lonely at times.'

Steve and Dodo were now ready to start the game.
'Ready?' said Cyril. 'Jolly good show. Now, you know what to do?' Dodo

and Steven nodded.
'Right ho then, ladies first.' He bowed to Dodo who took up the shaker and

threw the dice onto the nearest triangle; it showed a three. Counting from the
start triangle, she hopped a little unsteadily over to triangle four.

Cyril turned to Steven. 'You next,' he said.
Steven looked at him suspiciously. 'You're just too good to be true, you are,'

he said. Cyril gave another bland cherubic smile and Steven threw the dice and
got a four. Hopping past Dodo, he landed on triangle number five.

A buzzer sounded. Steven looked around: there on the indicator, the letters
resolved themselves into a direction which said, Move forward two paces.

Steven turned back to Cyril. 'It said move forward two paces. Do I?'
'Oh, you are a lucky chap,' said Cyril. 'Yes, go on to number seven.'
'Oh, one thing I didn't tell you by the way,' Cyril called as Steven hopped

two more paces to land on number seven. 'When a player lands on an occupied
triangle, the first player has to go back to the starting post.'

'Great,' said Steven to Dodo. 'Now I see why he let us go first. Well, go on
them. Don't keep us in suspense.'

Cyril took the dice shaker and threw a two. He grimaced and jumped two
squares to square three.

'My turn now,' said Dodo. She reachedover and took the dice fromCyril and
threw herself a three. 'Look,' she said to Steven. 'I've got a -' As the implications
of the number three sank in, her face fell. 'Oh, dear,' she said. 'That means I'll
be coming on your square, Steven.'

Steven turned back to Cyril. 'Surely we can't send each other home,' he
queried. 'We're playing together.'

'Those are the rules,' said Cyril a little smugly. 'You'll never win if you don't
follow them.'

Dodo jumped on to Steven's square. 'He's right, Steven,' she said. 'We must
play fair. We are two to one, after all.'

Steven nodded a little ungraciously. 'All right. But keep an eye on him.' He
hopped from triangle to triangle back to the start. When he landed on the start
triangle, it lighted up with the words Miss a turn.



Steven looked down in dismay. 'What does this mean?' he queried.
Cyril turned to Dodo laughing. 'He's pretending he doesn't know how to

play,' he said. 'What a sense of humour.' He turned back to Steven. 'It means you
miss your next turn. It's all part of the game. It's my turn now.' Taking the dice,
he threw a three as the other two looked at him suspiciously.

'Oh, a three. I'm still just behind you,' he said to Dodo. Dodo nodded and
turned back towards where the robot had now appeared with the chest screen
showing the Doctor's progress in the trilogic game.

'Look, Steven,' she said. 'The robot again. And it's got the Doctor's score on
it. The Doctor's reached 950. We'll have to hurry.'

She turned back again and gave a scream, staggering and almost falling off
her triangle. Someone with a hideous mask was leering at her. The mask dropped
and Cyril was revealed.

'It's only me, Cyril,' said the schoolboy. Steven jumped over to join them.
'I told you about those idiotic jokes,' he said threateningly. 'She nearly fell

off.'
Cyril laughed. 'All in the game, old chap. Now, you both go back to the

start. You've broken the rules by coming here.'
'That's not fair,' said Dodo.
'He cheated,' said Cyril. 'Moved ahead when it wasn't his turn. Now he must

go back to the start. I've landed on your square.' He turned to Dodo. 'So back
you both go.'

Steven's patience reached its limit. 'I've had enough of this,' he said. 'You
make the rules up as you go along. Come on, Dodo, we'll go to the finish and see
if that's the real TARDIS.' Steven turned and hopped on the next triangle moving
towards the Home triangle with the TARDIS behind it.

There was a thunderclap and the Toymaker appeared on the next triangle.
'Don't you like my little game?' he asked.

Steven stopped short,' startled for a moment, then he shook his head. 'No,
I don't,' he said.

'What a pity,' said the Toymaker. 'To give up now after having overcome
so many obstacles.'

Dodo shook her head: 'We're not giving up.'
'Are you sure?' asked the Toymaker. 'It sounded like it.'
'I must get to the end of this,' said Steven. He tried to get past the Toymaker

but seemed to bang up against some invisible wall. He reached his hand out -
there was something blocking the way.

'It's no use,' he said. 'There's some sort of invisible barrier here.'
'Precisely,' said the Toymaker. 'A barrier that yields only to those who play

fairly. Those are the rules. Now perhaps you will go back to the starting platform
as requested.' The Toymaker gave one of his slow smiles and vanished.

Steven stared after him for a moment, then turned back to Dodo. 'Come on,
Dodo,' he said. They went back to the beginning.

As Steven landed on number four, something hit him a sharp stinging blow
on the back of his neck. He teetered for a moment, raising his hand at the sting
and nearly fell.

'Ouch,' he said. 'What on earth was that?' He turned around. Cyril was
putting a catapult away in his pocket.



'Hurrah!' said Cyril. 'One up for me. Now it's my turn.' He threw a two with
the dice and advanced two more triangles.

Steven rejoined Dodo on the start triangle. 'I'm going to see if there is any
barrier around his back side,' he said.

'Oh don't,' said Dodo. 'Whose turn is it?'
'Mine,' said Steven. He rolled the dice shaker and got a six. 'That's better.'

He looked up and called across to Cyril. 'Do I get a second turn for a six?'
Cyril looked down his nose. 'Certainly not!' he said.
Steven nodded dryly. He was beginning to get the hang of this game. 'I

thought not somehow,' he said.
In the Toymaker's office, the Toymaker smiled at the invisible Doctor. 'I've

had to speak to your friends, Doctor,' he said. 'It seems they do not know how
to play a game fairly. But don't worry, Cyril seems to have the game nicely in
hand. I don't think your friends are going to get the TARDIS back. As you are
certain to lose, I feel I should be kinder to you.' He clicked his fingers. 'There,
I've given you back your voice. You are no longer under the ban of silence.'

The Doctor's hand continued to move above the trilogic board. The tally
recorder registered 960.

'Now you're sulking,' said the Toymaker irritated. 'Have you forgotten how
to speak?'

For a moment the hand hesitated, then the Doctor's voice came out clear.
'Throughout the game,' said the Doctor, 'you have done everything in your power
to break my concentration. It is very unlikely that you will succeed now.'

'Perhaps this will alter your concentration,' said the Toymaker. 'Look,
Doctor.' He pointed over to the screen and the picture reappeared. 'Your friend
Steven has had to miss a turn.'

Back in the toyroom, Steven had just landed on a triangle near the middle
of the game with Dodo two triangles behind him and Cyril now only four from
the finish line. Steven's triangle read Miss a turn.

Cyril turned back smugly. 'You haven't a hope of beating me now! Why
don't you both give up? I only need a three to win.'

Steven ignored him and turned to Dodo. 'It's up to you now,' he said. Dodo
shook her dice shaker and brought out the dice watched eagerly by Steven.

Neither of them sawCyril bring out a packet of powder and carefully spread
it over most of the triangle on which he was standing. He stealthily tried a foot
on it. The foot slid towards the edge. He drew it back and smiled.

'Look,' said Dodo. 'A six!' She started jumping on the triangles until she
was up to the square behind Cyril. 'I only need a four to get home now,' she said.

Cyril looked even more sulky. He was fast losing his cherubic quality. His
blue eyes now looked hard and cold. 'But it's my turn first,' he said pouting. 'Too
bad, isn't it?'

He threw his dice and it showed a two. Then he hopped forward two paces.
The triangle lighted up with the message Go back four paces.

Cyril looked around quickly at the other two. Steven and Dodo were
watching the counter on the trilogic game which had now gone up to 980. Cyril
bent down, trying to block the message with his body while he tied his shoelace.
But Dodo caught him out of the corner of her eye.

'Steven, look,' she said. 'He has to go back four paces.'



'Now who's trying to cheat?' said Steven.
'Give a chap time to tie his shoelace,' said the schoolboy. He straightened up

and sulkily jumped back past Dodo, being very careful to land on the unslippery
part of the triangle onto which he had put the powder.

'That's better,' said Steven. 'Go on, Dodo, you must get a four.' Dodo took
the dice shaker up and shook it only to be interrupted by a howl of agony. She
turned back quickly. Cyril was lying over the triangle with one foot dangling
over the edge. As she watched he brought it up and she could see blood soaking
his stocking.

'He's hurt himself,' said Dodo.
Steven shook his head. 'It's a trick. Throw the dice,' he said.
Cyril's shrieks got worse. He pulled his shoes off and Dodo saw that his

entire sock was soaked with blood.
'He's bleeding,' said Dodo. 'His foot must have slipped off and touched the

floor. He's really hurt badly, Steven. We can't just leave him there.
'Go ahead and play!' said Steven urgently.
'No,' said Dodo. 'I'm going to help him.' Dodo jumped back to Cyril's square

and immediately bent down to examine his foot. 'Where does it hurt?' she said
concerned. 'We'd better take your sock off.' She started pulling it and then looked
at her hands. 'This isn't blood,' she said. 'It's red ink.'

'Of course it is,' said Cyril rudely. 'You're too easy to fool. Now you can just
go back to the beginning and miss a turn for leaving your triangle.' He jumped
up in his stocking feet. 'That makes it my turn again.'

Dodo was outraged. 'Well,' she said. 'Of all the spiteful things.'
'Teach you to think you can beat me in a game.' He rolled his dice and threw

a five. 'A five!' he said. He quickly counted the spaces to home. 'Look! I've won.
I'm the winner!'

In his excitement, Cyril left his shoes standing where they were. He
immediately starting jumping the triangles back towards the home base and the
TARDIS. In his haste, he forgot the trap he had prepared for the others. His
stockinged feet landed on the slippery part of the triangle. He desperately tried
to keep his balance -his arms flailing, but it was no use. He shot over the edge of
the triangle and landed with a crash on the electrified floor. There was a shriek,
a puff of smoke and then silence.

Immediately all the lights on the triangles began flashing on and off. The
room began to darken.

'What's happened?' asked a frightened Dodo.
Leaving his triangle, Steven came over to join her. 'I don't know,' he said. He

jumped over to Cyril's last triangle, slipped but managed to regain his balance.
He leant down and felt the slippery dancehall chalk powder that Cyril had placed
on the triangle.

'Careful, Dodo,' he said. Dodo came up and carefully eased herself down
beside Steven on the triangle. 'Look,' he said. 'It's covered with some kind of
slippery powder. He must have put it on and then forgotten about it in the
excitement. Serves him right. He was caught in his own trap.' He looked over.
Where Cyril had fallen, there was merely a charred doll.

'Come on, Dodo,' said Steven. 'The game's over now.'



Dodo shook her head. 'No we'd better play the game to the end. You heard
what the Toymaker said. I'm sure I can throw that four.' She took up the dice and
closed her eyes in concentration.

'Dodo,' said Steven urgently. 'Look at the tally.'
Dodo glanced over at the robot. The tally now read 1014.
'The Doctor has nearly finished his game,' said Steven.
Dodo rolled the dice. It showed a four. 'We've won, Steven!'
'Quickly then, jump!' In a blaze of flashing lights, the pair jumped over the

remaining triangles to reach home base. As soon as they arrived, the flashing
lights stopped and the lighting came back to normal. They turned towards the
TARDIS. Steven put his hand out to the door and shook it but it was locked.

'Do you suppose it's the real one this time?' asked Dodo.
Steven listened. 'I think so. Listen, it hums. The others didn't hum,

remember.'
Dodo shook her head. 'It still doesn't mean it's the TARDIS,' she said. 'After

all our hard work.' She lent despondently against the door. Steven snapped his
fingers.

'Of course!' he said. 'The Doctor's still got the key. He will have to finish
his game first to come here to let us in.'

He turned to look back at the board. The tally now read 1022.



10. Stalemate

His game nearly completed, the Doctor suddenly found himself completely
visible again.

He was looking up at the screen, having watched Steven and Dodo
successfully complete their game. 'There,' he said tapping his lapel. 'I was right.'

The Toymaker, quieter than before, was sitting opposite him, watching the
Doctor, with his snake-like eyes. 'Make the last move, Doctor,' he said.

The Doctor thought for a moment. 'Aha, no,' he said. 'Not for a moment. I
see that Dodo and Steven have found the TARDIS. The moment they touched
it, your childish trick was broken - I'm visible again. Now you have to let us go.'

'You are indeed visible,' said the Toymaker. 'And you've done very well.
The three of you have won my little game.'

The Doctor turned and looked at him, a little caustically. 'I'm so glad you
take it so calmly,' he said. 'And now if you'll excuse me, I'd like to make sure the
TARDIS is all right.' The Doctor got up, walked over to the wall, part of which
immediately slid away, and passing through, he found himself in the game room
with Steven and Dodo.

Dodo and Steven had their backs to the Doctor and were trying to open the
door.

'Are you sure the Toymaker couldn't have made a TARDIS hum like this
one?' said Dodo.

'If he could have done that,' said Steven, 'why didn't he make the other ones
hum too.'

'Well done, my boy,' the Doctor's familiar voice sounded behind them. 'I'm
glad you're starting to put logic into your guesses.' Steven and Dodo whirled
around.

'Doctor,' cried Dodo, 'you're safe.' In tears, she ran over and hugged him.
'You've won your game.'

'Yes, yes,' said the Doctor. 'Well done, both of you. Well now, it's time to
be off. He crossed over, brought a key out from his pocket and opened the door
of the TARDIS.

'I certainly can't wait to leave this place,' said Steven. 'I hope I don't have
to play another game ever!'

The Doctor twinkled back at him. 'I don't think you'll have to, my boy.'
Abruptly the Toymaker appeared beside them. 'I hope I do not interrupt

your counsel of war,' said the Toymaker.
'Do not waste our time on trivial formalities,' said the Doctor. 'You have

been defeated. Leave us alone.'
'Yes,' said Dodo. 'You knew you must lose in the end.'
The Toymaker laughed at her. 'Oh, but you're so wrong. Only I can win. If

I lose, the Doctor and I go down together. Isn't that so, Doctor?'
'Go away, you charlatan,' said the Doctor.
'Ah,' said the Toymaker. 'Go on, young people, ask your elderly friend if

he can win completely.'



Steven turned around to look at the Doctor. 'Is it true, Doctor? Are we bound
to fail?'

The Doctor shook his head. 'No,' he said. 'He's trying to trick us into despair.
Don't listen to him.'

'Tell the truth,' the Toymaker insisted. 'Go ahead, Doctor. Hide nothing!'
Dodo looked anxious. 'You must tell us what you know, Doctor. We have

a right.'
Finally the Doctor nodded. 'Very well,' he said. 'I am compelled to tell the

truth. Even though we have won, there is still a chance the Toymaker can drag
us down in defeat with him. Unless ...'

'Unless,' Steven cocked his eyebrows.
'It's a question of timing,' said the Doctor.
'Oh please, Doctor,' said Dodo. 'Tell us, do we have a chance to escape?'
'Yes,' said the Doctor. 'We have a chance but we have to proceed very

carefully.'
The Toymaker smiled. 'An impossible chance,' he said.
Steven broke in angrily. 'As long as we defeat you, that's all I care about.

You can't beat us now.'
The Doctor turned and nodded approvingly to Steven. 'Well said my boy.'
'Well said?' rejoined the Toymaker. 'Does he know what he's saying?

Remember the past: remember my power.'
That was too much for Steven. Angered he turned on the Toymaker. 'We

won,' he said. 'You just won't acknowledge it.'
'Well perhaps you'd like to go through those little adventures again. And -'
Steven lunged forward at the Toymaker. 'Not before I lay my hands on you,'

he said. The Toymaker stood quite still, but Steven, acting as though he was
being violently manhandled, fell back, landing with a smack on the hard floor.

The Doctor helped Steven to his feet. 'It's no use, leave him alone.'
Steven said a little breathlessly, 'I can't touch him?'
The Doctor shook his head. 'He's using his mind to turn your own physical

energy against yourself.' He waved the other two into the TARDIS. 'Go on,' he
said. 'Inside. I'll deal with him.'

'I really don't know why you want to leave here, Doctor.' The Toymaker's
tone was most conciliatory now. 'There will always be a toymaker in the world
ready to make more and more inventive machines. That is, until one is made that
will destroy his world. But each time, the world can be recreated and we can
have the fun of building better and better toys. Why not join me, Doctor?'

The Doctor stared at him for a moment. 'I won't join you,' he said, 'because
you and your kind are evil. The toys you make have no use except to amuse
yourselves and ultimately lead to your own destruction. Toys should be left in
the nursery where they belong, not decide the fate of worlds. You have failed.'

He turned, ran into the TARDIS and slammed the door behind him.
The Toymaker looked after the Doctor for a moment, his face blank and

enigmatic. Then he smiled, laughed to himself, turned and waved his hand. The
trilogic game appeared before him with two chairs. Taking his time, the
Toymaker carefully sat down in one and rearranged his heavy, jewel-encrusted
Mandarin's gown around him. 'We shall see, old man, we shall see



Therewas a brief pause, and then, as the Toymaker had expected, theDoctor
slowly emerged from the TARDIS and came over to him. He was furious.

'What have you done?' said the Doctor. 'How dare you meddle with my
machine!'

'It isn't what I have done,' said the Toymaker. 'It's what you haven't. You
must finish the game. You cannot leave until you've finished it.'

The Doctor crossed to the trilogic game and looked down at it. 'Your
infantile behaviour is beyond a joke,' he said. He raised his hand to pick up the
last piece and then froze, remembering.

'No,' he said. 'No, Imustn't!' He pointed at the Toymaker. 'You nearly caught
me that time, didn't you?'

The Toymaker shrugged. 'Make your move, Doctor,' he said.
The Doctor shook his head. 'If I do so, then this place vanishes.'
The Toymaker nodded. 'Yes, you will have really won.'
'If this place vanishes, then the TARDIS and the rest of us will vanish with

it,' said the Doctor.
The Toymaker smiled a self-satisfied smile. 'Correct. That is the price of

success. Make your last move, Doctor. Make your last move.'
*
Inside the TARDIS, Dodo and Steven were waiting anxiously for the

Doctor. 'What can be keeping him?' said Steven.
Dodo shook her head. 'Something the Toymaker has done to the TARDIS.

The Doctor has to persuade the Toymaker to let us go, I think.'
Steven looked crossly at Dodo. 'We won his games, so we have the right

to go. The Doctor said so.'
Dodo shivered. 'Well, as long as I'm safely inside here, I don't mind so

much.'
They turned as the Doctor came in. For the first time, he was looking

worried and a little tired. He crossed over to the console and started tomanipulate
certain controls, then pressed a button. Nothing happened. He shook his head.
'It's no use,' he said.

'What's happened?' queried Steven. 'What has he done?'
'By beating the Toymaker we shall destroy this world.' 'What's wrong with

that?' said Steven.
'Surely, that's a very good thing. This is such a sad place,' said Dodo.
'You don't understand,' said the Doctor. 'As soon as the games are over and

won, the Toymaker's whole world vanishes and, as we are still trapped inside his
world, we will vanish with him. We will become non-matter.'

'But we have won,' Dodo cried. 'It hasn't happened yet.'
'It will the moment I go out there and make the final move on the trilogic

game.'
'Why doesn't he just let us go?' said Steven pacing up and down inside the

TARDIS. 'He can't want to be destroyed.'
The Doctor shook his head. 'He won't be.'
'If everything disappears, then why not him?' queried Dodo.
'If he loses the game,' said the Doctor, 'then his world vanishes. He doesn't.

And he has the power to build a new one.'
'How?' said Dodo.



'All toymakers are immortal,' said the Doctor. 'The urge to create toys that
are ultimately destructive is unfortunately part of our universe. This Toymaker's
lasted for thousands of years. Vey occasionally he loses one of his games, then
he has to pay the price.'

'And that price,' said Steven, 'is the loss of his world?'
The Doctor nodded. 'But he himself is not destroyed; he goes on forever.'
'Then we can't leave,' said Steven.
'There must be a way.' The Doctor turned back to the control panel and

turned on the scanner. They could see the Toymaker sitting beside the trilogic
board patiently waiting for them.

Then, as they watched, he came over close to the scanner and started
touching the TARDIS, admiring it. He tried the door, found it locked and smiled.

The Doctor turned, and called into the microphone. 'Will you leave my ship
alone!' he said.

'Oh, do let me have it, Doctor,' said the Toymaker. 'You must admit, we've
reached a stalemate now, and it would be such an amusing toy. You might as
well give up and join me.'

'Let me bring the trilogic board inside here,' said the >Doctor.
The Toymaker thought for a moment, then smiled. 'You must think me very

naive, Doctor. I see your ploy. If you can make the final move in there, then
you can preset your controls and dematerialise at the same moment as my world
vanishes. Then you'll get away from me.'

'That will make no difference to you,' said the Doctor. 'You can make a
new world.'

'Well, of course I can,' said the Toymaker. 'And I'm looking forward to that.
I was rather tired of this one. But, I'm such a bad loser, Doctor. I always destroy
the destroyer of my world.'

'I will not come out and make that move,' said the Doctor firmly.
The Toymaker smiled once more. 'Then you will stay there forever.'
Steven came to a resolution and walked up to the Doctor. 'Let me go out,'

he said. 'I'll make the last move for you.'
The Doctor shook his head. 'Nonesense, my boy. You don't want to

disappear.'
'At least you two can get away safely.'
The Doctor looked at his companion for a moment, moved. 'That's very

kind of you but I absolutely forbid it. You have done more than enough to get
the TARDIS back.'

'Well, something's got to be done,' said Steven. 'We can't just sit here and
talk our way out of this place.'

The Doctor wheeled on him, his eyes flashing. 'Of course!' he shouted.
'That's just what we can do! Talk our way out of here!'

For a moment Steven and Dodo stared at the Doctor wondering if he had
lost his wits. Then the Doctor turned around, speaking into the TARDIS's
microphone. 'Listen to me,' he said. 'I will make the final move.'

The Toymaker turned around to face the scanner and smiled a smile of
triumph. 'How sensible of you,' he said.

'Go back over to the trilogic table and take your seat there,' said the Doctor.



The Toymaker smiled, shrugged his shoulders, and then walked over and
sat down by the table. 'Are you ready?' asked the Doctor.

'Whenever you are, Doctor,' replied the Toymaker.
'Very well. Go to move 1023,' he said into the microphone.
Nothing happened.
The Doctor frowned, then his face cleared. This time, he pitched his voice

high, imitating the high sharp tone the Toymaker had used when he had issued
his directions to make the pieces move round the board in the trilogic game: 'Go
to move 1023.'

Taken entirely my surprise, the Toymaker glanced quickly at the board. The
final piece rose up in the air and started moving over. He quickly brought his
hand up to try and stop it, but it was too late. The piece hovered for a moment,
then settled on the top of the triangle.

Inside the TARDIS, Steven was activating the controls at the split second
the Doctor spoke.The familiar sound of the TARDIS dematerialising started up.
The screen went black and then gradually resolved itself to the disintegration of
a star. White clouds of debris flew in every direction. The Celestial Toyroom
was no more.

Almost unable to believe their luck, Steven and Dodo shook their heads in
astonishment. 'You did it!' said Dodo. 'You did it! We've got away!'

'Well done, Doctor,' said Steven. 'Well done. But how did you manage it?'
The Doctor turned back, looking very pleased with himself. 'Your idea, my

boy,' he said. 'When the Toymaker wanted to move the pieces, he told them to
move in a certain tone of voice, and they moved by themselves.'

'But you had to do it twice,' said Dodo.
'Ah, well,' said the Doctor. 'The first time didn't work because I used my

own voice. The second time I remembered, and imitated the Toymaker's voice
to make them obey me, and they did.'

'We'll never meet him again, will we, Doctor?' asked Dodo.
'Ah, I wish that was so,' said the Doctor. 'But the mind is indestructible and

so is the Toymaker. I'm afraid the world is full of destructive toymakers like him.'
'Do you mean that he and his like can never be destroyed?' said Steven.
'Even though you defeated him?' said Dodo.
'This time yes, but there will be other meetings in other times,' said the

Doctor. 'There will always be a Celestial Toyroom in the universe.'
Revision Notes:
Ver 1.0: Converted to html and proofread by ST7



Table of Contents
1. Trapped
2 Bring On The Clowns
4. The Hall of Dolls
5. Siege Perilous
6. The Last Deadly Sister
7. Enter Mrs Wiggs and Sergeant Rugg
9. The Final Test
10. Stalemate