DOCTORWHO
THEWARMACHINES

By IAN STUART BLACK

Based on the BBC television series by Ian Stuart Black by arrangement
with BBC Books, a division of BBC Enterprises Ltd

Number 136 in the Doctor Who Library

A TARGET BOOK

published by

the Paperback Division of W. H. ALLEN & CO. PLC



1. The Home-Coming

‘Right on time!’ called the Doctor.
Of course he knew that in one sense Time was a fiction – an attempt by man

to measure duration with reference to the sun and stars. But he also knew that
although such measurements were based on an impressive formula, all man’s
concepts were fraught with error. Time was not as it was supposed to be, for here
they were, he and his single crew-member, Dodo, travelling fortuitously across
space, splitting Time into fragments – or more exactly, ignoring the passage of
time, the rising and setting of the sun, the ebb and flow of tides, the coming and
going of the galaxy in which they voyaged.

‘Stand by!’ called the Doctor. He had a split-second awareness of where
they were, and knew how much it would mean to the girl, this home-coming.

‘I’m logging it on the computers,’ Dodo told him. ‘I’ve timed the entries.
You can see it on the graph.’

It was odd she should talk about time. They had their own time in this
encapsulated world of theirs, the TARDIS.

‘Watch the screen,’ she said proudly. ‘Pressing "Re-call"
The graph came up, a bold, splendid curve. Their progress was

unblemished. He could predict exactly where they would materialise, but he said
nothing.

Mixed with the pleasure he felt about their arrival, the Doctor experienced a
sense of concern, as though he were being given a whispered warning, an uneasy
sensation.

Dodo manipulated the instruments, sending a stream of data across the
screen. In the past Steven had handled this task, but now he was no longer with
them, she had taken over such calculations. It was still a new toy to her.

There was a brief, panoramic image of the city into whose ambit they were
emerging. Tall buildings were springing up where once Georgian squares had
stood, where the rubble of a recent war had lain. Now the city had been rebuilt,
and London rose, very much as it was.. And yet to the Doctor’s eyes, also very
different. One style was going – one tempo was giving place to another. A
generation had grown up which hardly remembered the carnage and they were
reconstructing their own capital.

Perhaps the thing that caught the Doctor’s attention – before he even saw
it, in fact – was the tall, graceful tower that stood head and shoulders above the
rest of London. What was it they had called it? The Post Office Tower? In all
probability they would change that name, but that was what they had first called
it. ‘The Post Office Tower,’ he repeated to himself. A symbol of recovery, he
thought with satisfaction. He had always enjoyed England, and in spite of this
warning whisper he looked forward to this visit. It was almost a holiday feeling.

He looked up at the screen. ‘Do you know where you are?’ he called.
Dodo saw the flickering pictures as they homed in. The focus steadied and

cleared. The scene was suddenly familiar– and yet she didn’t recognise
everything... She couldn’t be sure... But there! The bridges across the Thames!
The Parks! The great sprawling city!



‘It’s London!’ she shouted. She could hardly believe it! They had returned
to her own town... ! But when?Howmuch later thanwhen she had last been here?

Or perhaps it was earlier? That confused her. How could she be in a place...
her own world... older, even wiser... yet before she had left? Perhaps before she
was born?

The Doctor must have caught her thoughts. ‘A little time has passed, Dodo.
You won’t be out of place. What has happened – or not happened – will
synchronise with you and you will be totally accepted. You are back home.’

As they seemed to settle – that was the way she thought of it as the TARDIS
materialised – the pulse died in the dynamos and she could hardly wait to get
out, to see her own people again, to breathe her own air, mix with her own kind
and be back in a world she had thought she would never see again.

The Doctor watched, saying nothing, but guessing that she had travelled
with him for the last time. He would miss her – as indeed he regretted losing so
many of his fellow-travellers.

The scanner played over the city below them. The sensors of the TARDIS
– programmed by the Doctor over many journeys – fed responses to the Control
factor– that area the Doctor thought of as the brain.

He drew her attention to the pictures on the screen. People were hurrying
along a crowded street.

‘Do you see any changes?’ he asked.
She began to laugh. ‘Look at their hair! The length of it. Even the men!’
The Doctor saw little to laugh about. His own hair was as long as any man’s

in the streets of London on this spring day in the 1960s.
‘And the skirts!’ Dodo pointed. ‘They’re even shorter! And so many are in

jeans. What’s happened to the old "short back and sides", and the smart jacket
and ties?’ ‘There are some,’ pointed out the Doctor.

‘Not many.’
The screen showed a busy road, not far from elegant Regent Street.
‘It’s like a holiday town,’ said Dodo. ‘I don’t remember all those boutiques,

and that sort of music playing. Certainly not from shops... And all the people are
so young! It’s as though a new generation has taken over London.’

‘They’ve taken quite a step in that direction,’ agreed the Doctor a little
critically.

The scanner panned along a narrow alleyway. Perhaps it was still searching
for an appropriate place to ‘land’. As they panned past the corner, Dodo saw the
street name.

‘Carnaby Street,’ she frowned. ‘I don’t remember that. It wasn’t there
before.’

‘Everything changes,’ said the Doctor. ‘It’s all a fashion, my dear. What
you and I think is solid and permanent, is only a passing shadow. Part of the time
you lived in – your own time – is a memory to these young people.’

A quiet, old-fashioned London square, one that had as yet not suffered the
planners’ vandalism, came up on the screen, and she guessed this was where
they would make contact with Earth.

The outer door opened, but at the last moment Dodo didn’t race out into the
sunlight. She hesitated, running her hand over the structure of the ‘ship’ around
her. She had grown to love it – perhaps like the cave, the primitive safe place



that mankind – and certainly womankind –had relied on since the beginning of
time. And now, all at once, she had a feeling she was saying goodbye.

‘Come along!’ called the Doctor breezily. He was not one for sentimental
moments, nor for prolonging partings.

He strode sharply to the door.
And Dodo hurried after him.
The square was something of a cul-de-sac, and the corner in which the

TARDIS had materialised was tucked out of the way.
A few pedestrians hurried past, and a couple came out of one of the houses.

No one seemed to notice anything unusual.
The Doctor took a deep breath, savouring the bright morning. ‘Wonderful,’

he said. ‘Wonderful! What a pleasure to find ourselves here.’
‘What a home-coming!’ said Dodo.
‘So you know where you are?’ he teased her.
‘Of course. It’s marvellous to be back. It’s ages since I was here.’
He looked at her drily. ‘When you’ve seen as many ages as I have, you

won’t use that term so freely. In fact, it’s been no time at all.’
‘Right, Doctor. Let’s get moving.’
He was carrying a placard which he began to fix to the door of the TARDIS.

As he stepped back she saw it was a printed sign. It read: ‘OUT OF ORDER’.
She laughed. ‘What’s that for?’

He looked reproving. ‘The problem about being back in the twentieth
century is that the TARDIS could easily be taken to be what it appears to be...
if you follow me.’

Dodo lifted a finger. ‘Test Number One coming up,’ she said.
The young police officer had turned the corner. He saw the TARDIS, then

walked towards it. He had put his hand on the door when he saw the sign, gave
a grunt of annoyance and hurried away.

‘Test Number One, okay,’ said the Doctor with satisfaction.
‘But no one can get in anyhow,’ said Dodo. ‘I mean, not even the police

could open the door.’
The Doctor gave a thin smile. ‘Exactly... otherwise Scotland Yard could be

whipped off into time and space.’
Dodo was impatient. ‘Come on, Doc.’ She strode ahead.
A tall shadow lay at an angle across the square. As they reached it theDoctor

looked up, sunlight causing him to screw up his eyes.
‘So that’s it,’ he said.
‘What is?’ Dodo didn’t stop walking.
‘The Tower,’ the Doctor told her. ‘The Post Office Tower. Look!’ He

pointed to where it rose not far away – tall, graceful, dramatic. ‘It’s finished,’
he said.

She stopped and looked up. She wasn’t sure whether the building had been
started when she was last in London, and now it was complete – a landmark, a
symbol of a new age.

Even Dodo was impressed.
As the Doctor murmured to himself, ‘Very impressive,’ she had a sense of

pride.



‘Fab, isn’t it? That’s something Steven would have approved of.’ Steven,
her fellow space-traveller, was still very much in her thoughts.

‘Steven is too far away, and too busy right now,’ said the Doctor, ‘to worry
about... ’ He hesitated.

She stared at him. ‘What’s there to worry about?’ He made light of it.
‘There’s always something, you know. Things that need ironing out.’

She scoffed. ‘You’re imagining things.’
He looked at her. ‘You should know better than to say that, my child.’
She caught the serious note in his voice. ‘What is it, Doctor?’
‘I don’t know exactly. Just something alien.’ He looked at the Tower again.
‘Something to do with that?’
‘It could be... I’m not sure... but something... Not quite a threat... but... ’ He

made a gesture. ‘I just scent it.’
‘You scent it?’ Dodo grinned. ‘That’s good old London smog.’
He might have pointed out how free the city was from smoke, but he was

too absorbed.
As they left the square, he stopped and pulled back the sleeve of his jacket.
‘What’s the matter, Doctor?’
‘A prickling sensation,’ he said.
‘What do you mean?’
‘Our nervous system gives us messages, Dodo. If we care to listen to them,’

he said.
She could hardly take him seriously. On this sunny morning in familiar

London there was nothing but harmony and light.
‘Look at my skin,’ he said. ‘It’s like being stung by nettles. I get it when

something threatens – something powerful and inhuman.’
‘Inhuman?’
‘It’s very like my reaction to the presence of the Daleks,’ he added.
‘Daleks? What are they?’
‘Ah. You haven’t met my old enemies, have you? And I trust you never

will.’
He came to an abrupt decision... out of nowhere, it seemed to Dodo.
‘I must investigate that Tower,’ he said, and set off smartly.
Dodo trailed along in his wake. It wasn’t exactly the first thing she would

have done on this home-coming, but the Doctor was determined, and anyhow it
was a pleasure just to walk through the streets.

They stopped once not far from the Tower.
‘I remember a little milk-bar near here,’ said the Doctor. ‘We could both

do with refreshment.’
‘A milk-bar? What’s that?’ Dodo had never heard of one.
‘Ah, yes. Before your time,’ said the Doctor. ‘I wonder what is all the rage

today.’ He found the building and gave it a quick glance before they went in.
‘Roughly the same idea,’ he said. ‘But not milk. More like coffee. At least I hope
it’s coffee that comes from that contraption.’

A great metal instrument with an array of pipes, steamed behind the counter.
‘Two espressos coming up!’ said the assistant by way of greeting.
‘Taste’s not bad,’ said Dodo, after they settled into an alcove. Round them

was a sprinkling of customers, young office workers and the like.



‘From the Post Office,’ said the Doctor. ‘Engineers, technicians, I suppose.
They must employ quite an army to keep today’s communication system going.’

He took a batch of papers from an inside pocket. It always amazed Dodo
how much the Doctor managed to carry on his person. He would delve into his
floppy, velvet jacket, and fumble through documents, scraps of scribbled
formulae, a diary, some letters... ‘Ah, this could be it.’

He began to make notes, putting odd pages together, while Dodo watched
the crowd around her. She would have liked to join in the conversation, but it
was best to listen, to pick up bits of news that gave her an idea what had been
happening.

The Doctor looked up from his papers. ‘Did you ever come across one of
my former companions, Ian Chesterton?’ and before she had time to reply he
answered himself: ‘No, of course not. That was long before our paths crossed. A
clever fellow, Mr Chesterton. A name to be conjured with. I imagine in today’s
world of Technology, a name to be respected. I shouldn’t wonder if he didn’t
have some hand in establishing this very system.’

‘What system?’
‘This famous Tower... Yes, Ian would probably have trained today’s

scientists... Now, let me think.’ He made some quick calculations. ‘It’s so easy
to get one’s dates mixed, what with all this jumping about in time. But I suppose
he turned out to be a professor or a don, or whatever they call them. Anyhow, he
made a big impact on science at the start of this decade. So I’ll take a chance.’

He was writing out what looked like an official document, stamping it with
a seal which appeared as if by magic from another pocket; adding signatures,
one after another – none of them his own.

‘And there should be a covering letter... An introduction... Let’s see. From
whom? The PM? No, not a politician. That might be considered a little vulgar.
More like... Yes. From a university colleague. Nothing too ostentatious. From
a serious scientist. Someone who would appear to be my own age. That should
win confidence.’

She saw the ease with which he appeared to forge the letter of introduction
– although the word ‘forge’ never occurred to her. If the Doctor required these
documents it could only be for a good reason.

He appeared to read her thoughts. ‘The end justifies the means,’ he said
soberly. ‘After all, if what I fear is the case, we cannot be too fastidious with
our methods.’

‘Just as you say, Doc,’ she agreed. She admitted to herself that she had no
idea what he was talking about. But he seemed satisfied by her support. ‘Very
good, my dear,’ he chuckled. ‘Now let us put it to the test. Test Number Two,
as you might call it.’

He collected the batch of formal documents, slipped them into a large
envelope, and got up.

‘Lucky you had all that equipment with you,’ she said. But he didn’t seem
to notice the touch of sarcasm. ‘Here we go,’ he said. ‘And if at first we don’t
succeed we will certainly try again. Too much hangs on this, Dodo, to be fobbed
off at any stage.’



2. The Super-Computer

But to her surprise they were not fobbed off.
The documents presented at the reception area met with a rapid response.
‘Please come up, sir. And the young lady. Professor Brett will be delighted

to meet vou.’
The Doctor was concerned that his plan had worked so easily. Surely there

should be far tighter security. No wonder things might be going wrong.
But he need not have worried.
They were met by a sharp-eyed man, who politely syphoned them off into

a side office while their papers were checked and telephone calls were made in
the room adjacent to them.

‘What’s the excitement?’ whispered Dodo.
‘Very right and proper,’ the Doctor nodded with approval. ‘You can’t have

any old person just drop in here – to the nerve centre, so to speak..
‘But you’re not any old person,’ she protested. ‘Thank you. But in the eyes

of these gentlemen I am not to be accepted at face value. All personnel should
be checked. Particularly in this office.’

‘Why in this office?’
‘Because, my dear, because of what I think they have been up to.’
The sharp-eyed man rejoined them. ‘I amMajor Green. Professor Brett will

be free in just one moment.’
A light flashed above the door. ‘There he is now.’ They were ushered into a

very impressive room: part office, part laboratory. Equipment lined one side of
the room; files were packed along a second wall. The third wall was a window
that looked out over the city. But it was the fourth wall that fascinated the Doctor.
It was entirely given over to what he realised was an immense computer, quietly
ticking away in the background. Doing its sums, the Doctor thought to himself.
For such a large piece of equipment it was remarkably silent; the subdued hum of
dynamos had an almost soporific effect that belied the power the Doctor guessed
lay below the functional outline. He wondered what material had been used to
build it. Some sort of intensely durable plastic, he supposed.

It acted as a framework for an amazing battery of dials and lights, and there
was a fascinating rhythm about the way it functioned. It could almost be
breathing. The thought gave the Doctor a slight start. The overall structure did
resemble a human shape. A squat box-like head topped a powerful body, and
from a certain angle its panels took on the outline of a gigantic human.

The man behind the desk rose to greet them. ‘Professor Brett,’ the Major
introduced them, and then withdrew.

Professor Brett shook hands warmly. He was plump, middle-aged, with a
broad smile.

‘Come in. Sit down. Most pleased to meet you. I am sure I know who you
are. I’ve heard Ian Chesterton speak of you often. At least, I suppose you are
the Doctor he used to quote. As I remember it, a great expert in computers, he
used to say.’

The Doctor shook his head in protest.



‘Yes. I remember now.’ Brett nodded happily. ‘He has a whole appendix
to one of his publications. Your analyses of a very complex problem.’ He began
to rummage in his desk. ‘I thought so... There... Do you recognise that?’ He
snapped open a sheaf of papers...

TheDoctor let his eye flick through themass of equations on the desk before
him.

‘Ah yes,’ he said. ‘Quite so... Not that I would come to quite the same
conclusions if I were to do the work again today.’

‘No?’ Brett looked startled.
‘No,’ said the Doctor thoughtfully. ‘I would be more inclined to favour

introducing an unknown factor.’ ‘An unknown factor?’ Brett blinked at him.
‘The parts may very well generate something more than their components. I am
now favouring an element which I think of as a fusion... The unknown factor
created by the known... A random development.’ Brett watched him scribbling
on a scrap of paper on the desk. The Doctor pushed it across to him. The
mathematics were almost beyond him, but he immediately saw the principle at
work.

‘Amazing! I must follow this up. As a matter of fact..
‘Perhaps later,’ said the Doctor. He had his own reasons why he did not

want to continue the matter at that moment. After all, he had been concerned
only to supply his credentials, and that had been clearly achieved. He indicated
the computer against the wall.

‘As you may have guessed, Professor,’ he said, ‘I have had some
information about your work.’

‘It is on the Very Secret List, Doctor.’
‘And that is where it ought to stay,’ said the Doctor firmly.
The Professor looked at him sharply. ‘Indeed?’
‘Think what would happen if it got into the wrong hands,’ said the Doctor.

‘Or if in any way it were not controlled in the way you have designed it.’
‘No likelihood of that,’ Brett smiled. ‘It has been my life’s work. I am not

likely to pass it across to anyone else.’
The Doctor gazed at the throbbing bank of computers. ‘I had a strange

feeling as I arrived,’ he said. ‘I was aware of a vast source of energy.’
The Professor looked proudly at the banks of instruments. ‘I think I may

safely say it is years ahead of its time.’
The Doctor nodded. ‘You can certainly say that,’ he agreed.
The two men might have stood there for some time looking with admiration

– or apprehension – but Dodo piped up, ‘What makes it so special then?’
The Professor looked startled. ‘My–er–my secretary,’ explained the Doctor.

‘Dodo Chaplet.’
The Professor took a deep breath. ‘Well, Miss Chaplet. Admittedly this is

not the biggest computer in the world, but it is the most sophisticated. Power
and complexity count. This machine is about to be linked with a world-wide
network of simpler computers. An international bank. A Central Intelligence
with immense capacity.’

‘But to do what?’ persisted Dodo.



The Professor hesitated... then he said. ‘To think,Miss Chaplet. That’s what
it will be able to do. Think.’ ‘For example?’ Steven had once said that Dodo
could be like a dog with a bone. The Doctor was inclined to agree on this point.

‘For example,’ said the Professor. ‘Suppose an aircraft were flying over
the middle of some ocean when it develops a fault – in the electrical system, or
the controls. The fault must be attended to immediately or lives will be at risk.
After the link-up, the instruments on the aircraft will be able to feed back the
necessary data through the network and in a split-second the problem will be
received in this machine – and instantaneously the solution is given – then the
fault corrected. Or, again, suppose a doctor in a remote country needs details
for diagnosis, or the latest in treatments, the same network is put to use and the
data given.’

Dodo looked a little dazed as she gazed at the machine.
‘I see... At least, I think I see.’
The Professor smiled. ‘Perhaps it will become clearer tonight.’
‘What happens tonight?’ asked the Doctor.
‘The Press Conference,’ said Brett. ‘Doesn’t that tie in with your visit? I

thought that might be the reason you are here.’
‘Of course,’ nodded the Doctor. ‘I leave all these details to Dodo... Yes, my

dear fellow, I shall be there.’
Brett nodded. He pressed a buzzer.
The door opened and a girl hurried in.
‘And this is my secretary, Polly,’ said Brett.
She was an attractive girl with long blonde hair and blue eyes. Dodo decided

they were about the same age – not that Dodo was too sure what her own age
was nowadays.

Polly wore the type of clothes Dodo had just seen in the streets – a very
short skirt which displayed her long and shapely legs.

‘Now let me tell you one thing,’ went on Brett. ‘Although Polly is an
excellent typist – amongst other things – she is second-best to Wotan.’

‘Wotan?’ Dodo was puzzled.
Brett waved a hand towards the computer. ‘I call it Wotan... Will Operating

Thought Analogue... See?’
Dodo wasn’t sure that she did see, but the Doctor nodded.
‘Wotan not only types faster than Polly, operates faster, files faster, et

cetera, et cetera, but he also thinks faster than Polly, thinks faster than I do, and
is much more accurate than both.’

‘Is that true?’ Dodo turned to the other girl.
'Fraid so,’ grinned Polly. ‘And what’s more, Wotan never makes a

mistake... wretched thing!’ She pulled a face at the machine.
It went on purring softly in the background, lights flickering rhythmically.
‘Surely you’re not claiming to have invented a machine that thinks for

itself?’ said the Doctor. Brett hesitated, then nodded. ‘That is the case.’ ‘And
never makes a mistake?’ The Doctor was sceptical.

‘Never,’ said Brett.
‘Do you mind if I put this to the test?’ The Doctor stood before the machine.

‘It accepts audio instructions, I suppose?’
‘Of course,’ said Brett.



‘And this is the microphone?’ He indicated the instrument.
Brett nodded. ‘That takes over the function of the hearing system. There is

a system of pulses – transmissions –’
‘Naturally... ’ The Doctor needed no explanation. He spoke directly to the

machine. ‘What is the square root of 17422?’
A slip of paper appeared in the slot by the Doctor’s hand. He glanced at it.
‘Correct?’ smiled Brett.
‘One moment.’ That was in fact all the Doctor needed for his own

calculation He looked at the machine with approval. ‘Very good,’ he said.
Dodo took the Doctor’s place. ‘That was too easy,’ she said. ‘Let me try.’
‘Certainly,’ said Brett.
She gave the machine an amused smile. ‘Answer this, you comic-looking

contraption... What does the word "TARDIS" mean?’
The slip appeared as before, without the slightest pause. Dodo looked up at

the Doctor. ‘That’s scary,’ she told him.
‘What does it say, child?’
She read out, ‘TARDIS stands for Time And Relative Dimensions In

Space.’
The Doctor took the slip from her. ‘How could it have known this?’
Brett was delighted. ‘Wotan has his ownmethods... and his own secrets.’ He

turned to Dodo, who was standing as though transfixed in front of the machine
‘And now, Miss Chaplet... ’ She didn’t react. ‘Miss Chaplet... !’
The Doctor took her arm. ‘Are you all right?’ he asked.
‘Oh... what? Sorry... Yes, I’m all right... just a funny sound... A buzzing in

my head.’ She didn’t look too steady.
‘Sit down, love,’ said Polly. She took Dodo to a chair. Dodo sat for a

moment as the noise faded. She managed a faint smile.
‘Feeling better?’ asked Polly.
‘Much better. Thanks.’ She was glad the other girl was there.
The Doctor had already turned back to inspect the machine. Brett joined

him.
‘You look as though you could do with a bit of time off,’ said Polly. ‘Been

working too hard.’
‘I’m fine,’ Dodo assured her.
‘This your first time in London?’ asked Polly.
‘Oh no... but it must have been some time ago... I’m not quite sure when..

So I’m out of touch.’ ‘Then leave it to me,’ said Polly. ‘I’ll fix a break for both
of us, and I know the best spots in town.’ ‘I’d like that.’ Dodo felt her energy
flood back. ‘In fact I could do with a night out.’

‘I know the very place. Run by a girl I know. "The Inferno". That’s a date
for tonight.’

‘I’ll have to check with the Doctor.’
‘He’ll agree.’ Polly was confident.
The Doctor must have overheard, for he said, ‘You won’t be interested in

the conference this evening, Dodo. Why don’t you take time off?’
‘Told you!’ said Polly.
‘I may have to see you later,’ added the Doctor. ‘Where shall I collect you?’
‘It’s called "The Inferno",’ Dodo told him.



‘In Long Acre,’ added Polly. ‘A new discotheque. You can’t miss it.’
The Doctor nodded, but it seemed that he was already totally absorbed with

Wotan, as though there were only this complex and powerful piece of machinery
and himself in the world.



3. A Night Out

‘The Inferno’ certainly lived up to its name. Beat music throbbed
throughout the cave-like disco. The roof and walls were decorated with devils
dancing round flames in the spinning lights. It had been formed out of two old
wine-cellars. The floor of onewas packedwith dancers; the other had been turned
into a bar.

The person in charge was another girl, not out of her teens; mini-skirted,
cheerful and very confident. Dodo was amazed how youth was running its own
things in these swinging sixties.

‘There’s Kitty!’ Polly led the way across the crowded dance floor.
‘Hello, Polly! Am I glad to see you,’ said the girl behind the bar.
‘Dodo... Kitty. Kitty... Dodo.’ Polly introduced them above the noise of the

music.
‘Hi!’
‘Hi!’ That seemed to be the greeting of the day.
‘Just the person I need,’ went on Kitty. ‘I’m on my own... Need help... How

about a hand?’
‘Here we go,’ said Polly. ‘Behind the bar again, is it?’ ‘That too,’ said Kitty.

‘But a little Good Samaritan work first.’
‘Like what?’
‘Remember the sailor at the weekend?’
‘Propping up the bar?’
‘Right.’
‘Not especially.’
‘Well, he’s here again And it’s giving the place a bad name.’
‘Not behaving?’
‘Behaving all right. But he’s so miserable he’s putting a damper on the

place.’
‘What can I do about it?’
‘If you set your mind to it..
‘Okay. Flattery will get you anywhere.’
‘There he is, at the end of the bar. He just sits and mopes.’
‘So I see. No great advertisement for the place, is he?’ They could see

through the crowd a naval rating, sitting on a high stool at the end of the bar,
looking balefully at nothing.

‘He really has a problem,’ Polly agreed. ‘I might need your help, Dodo.
Stick with me.’

Dodo followed her. Polly looked as though she were going to walk past the
young man, but she stopped suddenly.

‘Well, hello!’ she said in surprise. ‘Didn’t we meet a couple of days ago?’
He gradually focused on her. A tiny flicker of interest managed to creep

into his eyes.
‘I think we did.’
‘You think?’ Polly appeared to be indignant. ‘You think we met! I must

have made a real impression!’ ‘Sorry. I didn’t mean that.’



‘Sorry! He says he’s sorry!’ Polly gestured to Dodo in disgust. ‘And as I
remember it you were just as cheerful last time.’

‘No law against that, is there?’ said the sailor.
‘Not if you’ve nothing better to do... And with that face. Look... I’ll show

you.’
She climbed onto the next stool and imitated the sailor’s glum expression.
‘Bad as that?’ he asked as he watched her.
‘Worse,’ she told him. ‘What’s the problem?’ ‘You wouldn’t understand.’
‘Try me.’
‘You’d think I’m some kind of nut.’
‘You probably are. But press on regardless.’
‘Well... It’s my ship... and my mates... They’ve gone off to the West Indies,

and I’ve got a shore posting... for the next six months.’
‘I see. So you’re missing all that South Sea Island stuff. Waving palms, blue

skies, warm seas, white beaches. You’re stuck here in barracks?’
‘If you’ve finished cheering me up..
‘Come on, Dodo. I can’t stand someone who’s sorry for himself... and can’t

take a joke.’
She started to move away, but her way was barred by a tall young man with

long hair and a smug expression. ‘Try me, darling,’ he said confidently. ‘I’ve
got a great sense of humour.’

‘You’d have to have,’ agreed Polly. ‘And get your arm out of the way.’
‘You don’t mean it.’
‘It might surprise you... ’ began Polly.
‘Flash is the name.’
‘It might surprise you, Flash, but I find you tedious.’ ‘Promise you, darling,

you’ll have a better time with me than with Shorty here –’ He jerked his thumb
at the sailor. ‘So let’s give it a go.’

He grabbed her arm and moved towards the dancers. Polly pulled away.
The sailor slipped off the high stool. ‘On your way, mate,’ he said.
‘Go and play toy boats,’ said Flash unpleasantly.
‘Push off, half-pint.’
The sailor moved so fast that Flash didn’t have a chance. He was in a grip

that had him helpless. ‘Lay off! You’ll break my back!’
‘Time you went home,’ said the sailor quietly. He let the other man go.

Flash spun round on hint, but the sailor was ready, karate-style.
‘I said, go home.’
For a couple of seconds Flash thought about snatching up a handy bottle,

but he changed his mind. ‘You’ve put my back out,’ he grimaced. ‘I’ll sue you
for that.’

‘You do that,’ said the sailor.
As Flash made for the exit, Polly said, ‘Thanks. I owe you for that, sailor...

Or do you have a name?’ He let his face crack into a smile. ‘Ben,’ he said. ‘Ben
Jackson.’

From where she stood Kitty watched the two of them move onto the dance
floor.

‘Nice going,’ she said under her breath.



The Doctor viewed with approval the way they had prepared the press
conference at the Royal Scientific Club. Even the journalists appeared to make
sense of the exhibits. The development of Computers was displayed and
documented, with explanations, photographs and designs.

The main exhibit – and the one that drew the biggest crowd – was a life-
size model of Wotan. The Doctor had almost begun to view him as an old friend.
Well, perhaps ‘friend’ was the wrong word. Wotan would have to reveal not
only his intelligence– and the Doctor needed no further evidence about that – but
would also have to prove it had something like a heart. The Doctor was surprised
to find himself thinking in these terms, for after all, a computer does not have a
heart! It is not a sentient being. It has no ethics, no morality – no conscience. It
is only the sum total of its parts, plus the knowledge which has been fed into it.
It cannot be wiser or cleverer than the brains that created it... Or could it? That
was the question the Doctor now asked himself. And he hoped at this juncture
to get some idea of the answer.

But very little had come out of the conference that theDoctor did not already
know. A panel of officials and scientists sat on a platform answering questions
from the floor. Lapel badges indicated the committee members, led by their
Chairman Sir Charles Summer. Beside him sat Professor Krimpton. It was
indeed a high-level panel that had been put together, though on the other side of
Sir Charles, the Doctor noted an empty chair.

‘You’ve heard the backroom boys,’ announced Sir Charles. ‘I just want to
remind you that C-Day – Computer Day– is nextMonday, three days’ time. Then
all sophisticated communication systems in this country, and in many other parts
of the world, will be linked with this central control we call Wotan, and will
in fact be subservient to it. Professor Krimpton has told you of its peaceful and
military capacity. I need hardly point out what an enormous step forward this is
for Britain and, I think I may say, for the rest of the world.’ There was a sea of
waving papers from the floor.

‘Doesn’t this put a lot of power into the hands of whoever operatesWotan?’
The journalists were already writing the headline... ‘Bureaucrats, the new
Dictators’.

‘No one operates Wotan,’ protested Sir Charles. ‘He operates himself. A
computer is merely a mechanism which thinks logically, solving a problem
without any political or private end. A disinterested intelligence, making
calculations, providing truthful answers, structured by mathematical laws. It has
no imaginative powers.’

‘No way of supplying false answers?’ came the question from the floor.
‘Not if it has been correctly programmed. And that is certainly the case with

Wotan. Don’t forget, such a mechanism is merely our servant.’
‘And this "thinking" that you say it does... Is the process similar to the way

we think?’
‘Whenwe think logically andwithout emotion, then yes. That is howWotan

functions, but in his case with fantastic speed and accuracy, able to handle
hundreds of problems at once, without mistakes.’

‘How about if it gets so smart it decides to get along without people?’
There was a burst of laughter, and the question was the signal for the break-

up of the meeting.



Sir Charles indicated the empty chair beside him. ‘I expected Professor
Brett to have been here by now. He should have answered most of these
questions.’

Krimpton leant across. ‘You know what he’s like, Sir Charles. He gets so
involved with his work..

‘All very well. But this is really his show.’ He turned to the audience. ‘Bear
with us, gentlemen. Professor Brett will be along in a moment or two.’

At the back of the room the Doctor frowned. So Brett was supposed to be
there? He wondered uneasily what had happened to him. He moved away, and
found himself staring at the model of Wotan.

Brett first had telephone calls which delayed him, and now that hewas ready
to go, he knew something was wrong. The security graph that recorded entry
to this restricted part of the Tower was inaccurate. A series of small breaks
appeared, as though the mechanism had developed a hiccup. Or perhaps an
irregular entry had been made, the graph had started to record it, and then it
had been overridden. For that to happen once was unusual, but this appeared to
have taken place about a dozen times in the last hour. Security had been about to
move into the alert sector, and each time it had been prevented. Could someone
have been interfering with the alarm signal?Was there someone in the Restricted
area? He felt suddenly apprehensive, looking round the room nervously. There
was only the familiar sight of Wotan ticking quietly, flickering lights... nothing
out of place. And yet the Professor was overcome by a strange uneasiness.

He was late for the conference, but he couldn’t leave with these doubts
in his mind. He disliked calling in Major Green unnecessarily, but this was an
emergency. The Major answered the buzzer immediately.

‘Still here, Professor? I thought you had to go to this conference?’
‘Have you been on duty yourself?’ asked Brett. ‘Why, yes.’ The Major was

surprised.
‘Our usual Security screens are in operation?’ ‘Of course.’
‘So you would know if... well, if there had been an intruder?’
The Professor was so unlike his normally bland and relaxed self that the

Major looked at him sharply. ‘There’s been a complete security screen on the
Restricted Section. It functions night and day. Why? Have you any reason to
suspect anything?’

‘The Recorder Graph has developed a fault.’ Brett indicated the print. ‘One
can’t be too careful.’

‘Of course not.’
‘Besides..’ Brett hesitated. He wasn’t a man to give way to irrational fears.

‘I’ve had an odd feeling this last hour or so. As if I were being watched. As
though a stranger were somewhere around.’

‘I can assure you,’ said the Major, ‘you and I are the only people in this part
of the Tower. The rest of the staff are attending the conference.’

‘I must go.’ Brett started to cram papers into his briefcase. ‘Sorry, Major.
I think I’ve been overdoing things lately. Next week I intend to start a long
holiday.’

‘Good night, sir.’ The Major went back to his office. He had suggested
several weeks ago that Professor Brett took a holiday. The man had worked
himself into the ground perfecting that confounded computer of his!



Brett suddenly stopped packing his case. None of these papers were
relevant. He was behaving in an extraordinary fashion. He knew it... But why?
He couldn’t help it. He was suddenly so nervous.

Unable to get out of the room... Unable to leave for the conference.
‘This is ridiculous,’ he said aloud. He made a determined effort. He was

sane and rational, he told himself. One did not entertain or tolerate fantasies.
Yet the ideas which kept flooding into his mind... breaking into his thoughts –
taking over his thinking in fact – were fantasies. And he would not permit it.
He had been working too hard lately. Too long. He was exhausted. That was
it. That was the cause of these extraordinary impulses that burst through, rather
like pulses of electrical currents. He could handle it. He would leave now and
go to the conference...

But the ticking of the machine against the wall seemed to grow louder. The
lights leapt, and blazed more vividly. He was being mesmerised, he decided. It
was some sort of trance. An hallucination. He was Professor Brett... He was the
inventor... The creator... He was the Master... in charge... No man becomes the
servant of his own creation. He was fighting hard to hold onto his sanity. To
retain dignity, strength. To retain his own integrity...

But he knew it was a losing battle. And one small part of his brain was
strangely proud that he had made such a powerful instrument he himself could
not stand up to it.What a triumph! Even though he should suffer or be destroyed–
and by his own invention! What a triumph!

He tried to open the door and get out, but it was useless. He couldn’t move.
He could not escape. Finally he was forced to turn and stare at the machine, to
move towards it... as though programmed himself, unable to break the pattern.

He was in a trance as he stood before Wotan. ‘What do you want of me?’
he asked.



4. Servant turned Master

Gradually Dodo realised that she was not enjoying herself. She couldn’t
think why, for she had been dancing, and chatting to the others. She was at the
table when Polly and Ben came off the floor.

‘Things look a little brighter now, do they, sailor?’ laughed Kitty.
‘Who wants to go to the West Indies anyhow!’ agreed Ben.
Kitty shook her head at Polly. ‘I don’t know how you do it,’ she said.
‘Just a knack, love,’ grinned Polly.
‘You can have a job here any time,’ Kitty told her. ‘I like the one I’ve got,’

said Polly.
Dodo listened to the cheerful talk around her, but it didn’t seem real. What

should have been a party was being spoilt by something she couldn’t put her
finger on.

‘You all right, love?’ Polly was quick to notice the other girl’s silence.
‘I’ve got a headache,’ said Dodo.
‘It’s this noise,’ agreed Ben. ‘That disco beat could bust your eardrums.’
‘It’s a sort of humming noise,’ explained Dodo. ‘It’s been coming and going

since I was in your office... There! It’s stopped again, I’ll be all right.’ She smiled.
‘Great,’ said Ben. ‘Okay, Polly. On your feet.’

‘Here we go again,’ sighed Polly as she let Ben lead her back amongst the
dancers.

Dodowaited until they were lost in the crowd, then she put her fingers to her
ears. The noise of humming, like the sound of a dynamo, blotted out everything.
She couldn’t understand how no one else heard it. It was so real, so insistent...
She was hardly able to think. The room, the music, the dancers – everything
receded. The noise and laughter seemed to die away. She wondered whether the
lights were really growing dimmer...

She had to get away from this place...
She wondered what was happening to her.
Sir Charles had decided to close the conference. ‘Sorry, gentlemen. I’m

afraid Professor Brett isn’t going to make it. Something important must have
turned up. We’ll issue a statement..

He broke off as Brett hurried into the room, pushing past the Doctor without
appearing to recognise him. TheDoctor noted the strained expression on his face,
and the fact that Brett was wearing a raincoat and gloves.

‘Sorry I couldn’t attend,’ called out Brett. His voice sounded different to
the Doctor – impersonal, detached, as though he were reading a speech.

‘It was... unavoidable,’ went on Brett. ‘Apologies.’ ‘Now you’re here,’ said
Sir Charles, ‘you might like to tell our guests something about –’

Brett interrupted curtly. ‘I’m afraid I’ve no time. I must speak to Professor
Krimpton.’

Sir Charles was indignant. ‘The Press have come here on our invitation –’
‘This is urgent.’ Brett brushed him aside. ‘Where is.. ah, there you are,

Krimpton.’



‘You wish to see me?’ Krimpton was taken aback. ‘Please come with me,’
said Brett.

‘I’m from theNewYorkDaily Sketch... ’ called out someone from the floor.
‘No comment,’ said Brett. He took Krimpton by the arm.
‘You haven’t heard the question,’ shouted the journalist.
‘I can tell you nothing,’ said Brett. He was leading Krimpton from the room.
The Doctor noted the glazed look in Brett’s eyes. This was not the same

man he had met that morning. The warmth had gone... He seemed to be driven
along by some internal force.

‘Deus ex machina,’ whispered the Doctor to himself. ‘In one sense or
another.’

He watched the two men leave the room, then made his way through the
crowd of journalists – now with a ‘human story’ – more interesting than
technicalities about computers - and joined Sir Charles.

‘Tell me, Sir Charles,’ he said, ‘who exactly is Krimpton? What is his
contribution to the work?’ ‘Electronics,’ said Sir Charles sharply. ‘One of our
top men. Still, there can’t be any excuse... Damn bad manners. Wonder if
something’s gone wrong with the project. Must be serious before Brett would...
I’d better check.’

Sir Charles hurried away.
The Doctor was thoughtful. The possibilities of what might have happened

were many and various... But they were all too fantastic for the Doctor to accept.
Major Green had been suspicious ever since Brett had left his office. He

had no idea what was wrong, but something very strange had taken place, and it
was his job to make sure that the Restricted Area remained secure.

He patrolled the corridors outside the main office, double-checking every
half-hour. He tried doors, tested locks, but there was nothing unusual. And yet
some of Brett’s nervousness seemed to have rubbed off on him, and the Major
found he was imagining things–sounds, movements, a strange atmosphere.

He stopped for the tenth time outside the door to Brett’s room. Was it his
imagination? Or was the sound of the computer’s constant ticking louder? It
sounded erratic. He listened, catching his breath... It was certainly different.

He hesitated before unlocking the door. Even as he opened it, he heard the
sudden abrupt and irregular tone of the machine. It had never sounded like that
before.

He went in and was shaken to see two vivid lights shining directly at him.
The glare was blinding. He tried to shield his eyes.

He should have backed out, he told himself. But he was dazed by the beams.
He experienced a strange helplessness, as though hypnotised, with no will of his
own.

He closed the door and moved towards Wotan. There was no doubt; the
machine was louder, stronger. Lights blazed, and there was an air of power and
assurance about it as it dominated the room.

The Major moved to the front of the machine, and stood passively for a
few seconds before putting both hands into the slot that delivered the printed
messages.

His face was contorted with pain for a second, then he withdrew his hands.
The bones were showing through the skin, giving a skeletal effect, as though a



light were shining through the flesh. The Major put the tips of his fingers
together.

He looked dumbly at the machine. ‘I understand,’ he said in reply.
He took a pair of gloves from his pocket and pulled them on. Then he

crossed to the desk and began to dial a number.
‘It’s for you, Dodo,’ called Kitty above the noise. ‘Telephone. Corner of

the bar.’
Dodo wondered who would know to call her there. Perhaps, the Doctor.
‘Hello... Yes... Who is that?’
‘Hold the line one moment,’ said the Major. He plugged the extension into

the computer. Dodo’s voice could be heard through the machine. ‘Speak up.
There’s so much noise.’

The reaction was immediate. Wotan went into action – lights leaping into
life, a battery of signals seeming to race from within.

At the other end of the lineDodo listened impassively. Then she said, ‘Yes...
I understand.’

She put down the receiver, and turned towards the exit. No one noticed as
she went – quietly, subdued, oblivious of her surroundings.

Brett led the way hurriedly and Krimpton was hustled along in his wake. He
had never seen his old friend in such a state. Not at all like himself. Nevertheless
it was an extraordinary way to behave!

‘I must say it’s very odd, Brett, to break up the meeting like that.’
‘I had no choice.’
‘What do you mean by that?’ They were striding through the Restricted

Area towards Brett’s office. ‘You will soon understand.’ He didn’t offer any
further explanation.

‘This is a bit much,’ protested Krimpton. ‘It’s late and I can spare only a
couple of minutes..

‘Nothing is too much,’ said Brett coldly.
Krimpton supposed that the worst must have happened. ‘Has the computer

system broken down?’ ‘On the contrary,’ said Brett, ‘it is we who have broken
down. It is we who have failed.’

The man didn’t make sense. ‘We’ve failed?’ They reached the outer office.
‘In what way?’

‘Humanity has come to a standstill intellectually. We are unable to develop
our Earth properly. Progress is beyond us.’

‘For heaven’s sake, Brett. This is nonsense!’
Brett was unlocking his office door, but he halted to look severely at his

friend. ‘Be careful what you say, Krimpton. This is the conclusion reached by
Wotan.’ He opened the door and ushered the other man in.

‘Are you joking? Do you mean to tell me that this machine..
‘It’s no joke,’ cut in Brett. ‘Wotan has decided the world cannot continue

the way mankind is running it.’ He looked at Krimpton as though he were stating
a Truth handed down from the heavens. It was comic! Krimpton began to laugh.
The Professor was taking his invention too seriously.

‘And what does Wotan propose to do about it?’ he asked. ‘Take over the
job from us?’



‘Correct.’ There was no flicker of a smile on Brett’s face. He was cold and
aloof as Krimpton had never seen - him before. ‘From now on we are to serve.’

‘And what if mankind doesn’t cooperate? What happens? We all get
obliterated?’

‘If necessary.’
The man was to unlike himself, so alien, that Krimpton was alarmed.

‘You’ve gone off your rocker, old fellow,’ he said, and backed cautiously
towards the door.

‘You can’t get away,’ said Brett.
‘You’ve been working too hard, my friend,’ said Krimpton. He threw open

the door. The Major was standing just outside.
‘Thank goodness you’re here, Major. He’s off his head... right round the

bend!’
The Major shook his head. ‘He’s not mad, Professor Krimpton.’ There was

the same impersonal look in the Major’s eyes, the same lack of emotion.
Krimpton tried to push past. ‘Let me out!’
He was no match for the Major as he was forced back into the room. ‘I

refuse to be treated like this!’ he shouted. ‘I won’t stay... ’ He saw the phone on
the desk and snatched it up.

‘Put that down,’ ordered the Major.
Krimpton was shaking so much that he couldn’t use the dial.
‘Let me go!’
The Major closed the door and came towards him. ‘Keep away,’ pleaded

Krimpton. ‘Just leave me alone... Let me... ’ The strength had gone out of him,
and his voice trailed away. He became aware of two powerful beams of light
playing over him.

The computer had been silent, but now gradually came to life. The sound
of its electronic pulses quickkened.

Krimpton gazed at it with alarm. ‘It’s not possible,’ he whispered. ‘Not
possible... not possible..

He tried to cover his eyes, but there was no protection from the light.
He made a last protest, calling out, ‘I don’t believe it! I won’t serve you... I

am not a machine... I am a person... A human being! The most important thing is
human life. It doesn’t matter if we are not as efficient as you are. Machines are
not masters... We made you for our purposes... ’ His voice cracked. He stopped
for a few seconds, then moved trance-like to stand before Wotan.

‘What do you want?’ he asked in a flat, impersonal voice.
It was shortly before the Doctor arrived to collect Dodo from ‘The Inferno’

Club that Polly discovered that the girl was missing. She, Kitty and Ben searched
the cellars, but there was no sign of her.

‘Surely she wouldn’t just leave without a word,’ said Polly. ‘I’m worried.
I’m supposed to be looking after her.’

The Doctor made an impressive contrast with the rest of those who still
packed the floors as he arrived. ‘There you are!’ he greeted them. ‘I imagine you
and Dodo have enjoyed yourselves – if the amount of noise is anything to go by.’

‘We can’t find Dodo,’ Polly told him. ‘We think she must have gone.’
The Doctor frowned. ‘But where could she go? She doesn’t know anyone

here nowadays.’



‘She had a phone call... about half an hour ago. We haven’t seen her since,
‘Who was the call from?’

No one knew.
‘And who is this young man?’ He indicated the young sailor.
‘The name’s Ben. He’s been helping to look for Dodo.’
‘Very well,’ said the Doctor. ‘We’ll have another quick search. After all,

she might still be somewhere in this crowd.’
There was no longer any discord in the office. The three men were united

in a common purpose.
‘We are here to serveWotan,’ said Brett. ‘On his instructions newmachines

must be constructed. The best and finest human brains must be conscripted to
accomplish this task. It is top priority. We must design the new models to
supersede human life, then they in turn will take over the march of progress, and
they will design a further generation. We are all servants to this cause. It is the
purpose of our existence.’

The other two men nodded. They understood and approved.
‘We must plan this campaign under the instructions of Wotan,’ went on

Brett. ‘We are fortunate to be enlisted at the very start of this historic undertaking.
Once we have collected the team that Wotan demands we will launch the next
step in the operations.’ There was a moment’s silence before he continued. ‘I
speak for Wotan and, Major, you are in charge of planning.’

He handed a slip of instructions to Krimpton. ‘You are to supervise the
electronic design and construction of the new machines.’ There was total
acceptance and dedication from all.

‘We failed in one important aspect whenWotan was designed,’ added Brett.
‘The new machines are to be mobile, able to move freely, and each is to have an
independent, self-generating, source of power.’

Krimpton read out his fresh instruction. ‘They must all carry their own
weapons.’

There was a rapid outburst of signals fromWotan. It was possible to feel the
frustration within the machine at having to be dependent on three such fallible
human beings.

‘All control is to be centralised in this office,’ said the Major.
There was a pause, then Brett announced, ‘The first step to be taken is to

complete the planning team. For that Wotan demands one special brain. We are
instructed to make sure he is brought here with great urgency. In three days’
time a switch-on which links up a network of computers will take place. That
is our deadline.’

‘What is this special brain?’ asked Krimpton. ‘It is forbidden to ask
questions,’ said Brett. ‘We obey orders,’ said the Major.

‘The task of enlisting the special brain is already under way,’ Brett told
them. ‘To lure him here we have had to provide ourselves with bait.’

The Major lifted a warning hand. ‘Someone is coming.’
Brett was not concerned. ‘It is the fourth member of our planning staff.

Summoned to receive instructions.’ They didn’t know whom to expect as the
door opened, but they were startled to see a girl walk in.

‘The Doctor’s secretary!’ said Brett.



Dodo didn’t appear to notice the three men. She walked towardsWotan and
stood directly before the machine.

‘What are my instructions?’ asked Dodo.
The computer reacted explosively. Noise and lights reached an alarming

pitch... but there was no electronic message, no slip of paper with instructions
followed. Instead there was a sudden silence, then a strange metallic sound. The
voice that came from the machine was synthetic, and high-pitched – totally
impersonal.

‘You... are to... bring the Doctor... here... The Doctor... is required... You
understand?’

Dodo made no reply. She turned and left the room as she had entered,
oblivious of everything else around her.



5. Putting the Team Together

The two powerful lights that shone from Wotan dominated the office, and
they now appeared more than ever like eyes. To the three men the machine took
onmore andmore the essence of some great controller, an almost god-like figure.
Neither Brett nor Krimpton had any sense of having created this monster; they
knew they were its creatures, cogs in its mechanism—there merely to perform a
function, without thoughts of their own, without personality, without humanity,
in fact. The reversal of roles was complete. As for Major Green, he had
transferred his loyalty from one set of masters to another. What he had done
for Security he would now do for Wotan – with one difference. He was totally
dedicated to this new master. There would be no qualifications; he was ready
to die in its service.

Each man understood the part he had to play in Wotan’s scheme of things.
Brett was its mouthpiece. The energy used by the machine’s effort to speak was
enormous. Even as it intoned in its metallic fashion, ‘Instructions must be given,’
dynamos reached a pitch that shook the room. Brett took over–the words merely
being transmitted through him.

He turned to the other two. ‘These are your orders, and time is short.
Progress is not possible unless Wotan is in control over the next few days. After
that, Wotan will make known the future of our race, who shall live and serve,
and who shall be obliterated.’

There was no protest. The statement seemed logical and inevitable.
As Brett spoke a message-slip rattled from the teleprinter. He handed it to

Krimpton. ‘Read it.’ Krimpton nodded. ‘London is the first capital to be taken
over,’ he read out. ‘Then Washington, Moscow, Paris and Tokyo. In order to
accomplish this the War Machines must go into production immediately.’ No
one questioned what they might be. The knowledge was already implanted in
their intelligence.

‘For this,’ said Brett, ‘we require highly skilled labour as well as manual
workers. A first priority is to create this force. It is to start work now.’

It was as though the machine was clarifying to itself the necessary steps to
be taken. The teleprinter burst into life. Brett read out the message, ‘Contact is to
be made by telephone with these people. When they answer and contact is made,
the switch is to be made through to Thought Control. In this way, Wotan will
enlist each individual. Once the switch is made they will be unable to resist.’

Again that seemed obvious to the others.
‘And when we have made this contact,’ said the Major, ‘where are we to

construct these machines?’ ‘That is your function,’ Brett told him. ‘You are to
find suitable places in Central London – warehouses, factories and the like. You
must be careful not to arouse suspicion, for we are vulnerable only for these
first few days. After that nothing will be able to oppose us.’ There was no sense
of betrayal in their voices as they planned the destruction of their own kind,
indeed, there was no judgement or morality in their strategy. The overwhelming
of humanity was being planned as carefully and mathematically as any other
scientific project, and with as little morality. The tasks of the intellect had to be



carried out, regardless of the outcome to the world at large. Other men would
have to pick up the pieces – that is, if there were any other men left to do it.

Major Green acknowledged his instructions, turned and left the office.
Brett faced Krimpton, looking blankly at him as he issued his instructions.

‘You are to complete your work on the electrical programme. It is to be devised
for the new generation of computers that the War Machines require. It is
important they are able to move freely of their own accord and at their own will.
They will contain their own power. And finally, all the systems as devised must
be integrated through the system already controlled by Wotan.’

None of this seemed to dismay Krimpton. ‘I shall begin at once,’ he said.
But Brett stopped him. ‘No,’ he said, ‘there is one priority which is even

higher, and you are required to assist with that. Top priority is to enlist theDoctor.
It is his intellect that Wotan most requires. It was on his arrival here that this
development became possible, and has been brought forward. He is our quarry.
Before all else. We must make sure of him tonight.’

Krimpton seemed to hesitate for the first time. Perhaps he failed to see how
the next stop could be fulfilled in that space of time.

Wotan responded instantaneously. Themachine blazedwith light, the office
shook with its power, chained as it was to the structure around it. The voice
cracked into life. ‘At once!’ it sounded. ‘At once! The Doctor is required!’

Krimpton bowed in recognition.
Music still played in the background at ‘The Inferno’ Club, but the place

was almost empty, only Polly and Ben remaining with the Doctor, while Kitty
began to lock up the place.

‘I’m sorry,’ she said. ‘I can’t think what’s happenend to Dodo, but I have to
close the Club. If you think she’ll turn up here, we can pin a message to the door.’

TheDoctor nodded thoughtfully. ‘Very kind,’ he said. ‘I shall do that.’ Polly
was uneasy. ‘Perhaps we should go to the police.’

‘I’d rather you didn’t,’ said Kitty. ‘I’ve got a licence to think of.’
‘Well, we have to do something.’ Polly wasn’t easily dissuaded. ‘I’ll phone

the hospitals.’
‘Hospitals?’ Ben frowned. ‘You certainly expect the worst.’
‘She could have had an accident,’ insisted Polly. She turned to the Doctor.

‘What’s her last name?’ ‘Chaplet,’ he told her. ‘Dodo Chaplet.’ He was
impressed by the way this seemingly scatter-brained girl was organising things.

‘Regular little ray of sunshine, you are,’ grumbled Ben.
‘Better than just sitting on our backsides,’ called Polly as she headed for

the phone.
She stopped in her tracks as Dodo breezed into the room. She greeted the

Doctor brightly. ‘Hello, Doctor! So you found the place after all?’
The Doctor was so pleased to see her that he only vaguely noticed she was

wearing gloves.
‘And where have you been then?’ asked Ben crossly. ‘Yes, what happened

to you?’ said Polly.
Dodo looked surprised. ‘I was just round the corner.’ ‘You’ve been away

hours,’ protested Polly.
‘We were all worried about you, Dodo,’ said the Doctor.



‘Well, you shouldn’t have been,’ said Dodo. ‘I ran into some friends. I just
stopped by with them for a chat... Was I really that long?’ She seemed to be
taking it very lightly.

‘Indeed you were.’ The Doctor was puzzled. ‘You never mentioned you
had friends near here.’

‘It’s a long story.’ Dodo shrugged it off. ‘Sorry you were worried, Doc.’
‘Well, Dodo, you and I have an invitation to stay the night with Sir Charles

Summer and his family. It’s very late. We ought to go.’
‘I’ll find you a taxi,’ said Polly. ‘And maybe I can cadge a lift.’
Time I turned in.’ Ben led the way from the Club. No one noticed the look

of annoyance that passed across Dodo’s face.
Outside they said their ‘goodbyes’ as theymoved towards the huge fruit and

vegetable market that served London. Covent Garden at this time of night had
not yet started to come to life for its early morning trading. It was silent and lay
in shadow for the most part. Warehouses were locked and shuttered. Their steps
echoed as they crossed the ancient square. The arches darkened the sidewalks.

Dodo looked around anxiously as Ben joined them. ‘Are you staying long
in London?’ he asked the Doctor. ‘A few days at least,’ said the Doctor. ‘That
is our plan, isn’t it, Dodo?’

She quickly moved in beside him. She must do nothing to arouse suspicion.
‘Yes. A few days,’ she agreed.

‘You wait here,’ said Ben. ‘I’ll fetch a taxi.’
He hurried away. Polly ran after him. ‘I know where they hang out,’ she

called.
They disappeared round a corner.
‘They shouldn’t have done that,’ said Dodo.
‘Why not?’ The Doctor was surprised. ‘Very helpful couple of young

people, I thought.’
Dodo forced a smile. ‘You’re right.’ She looked to see whether the Doctor

noticed anything different about her. He didn’t seem to. This was extraordinary,
she thought. For everything about her, she knew, had changed. But he was totally
unaware. That was a good thing. It would make what she had to do all the easier.

She glanced down the darkened street beside them. A truck had been parked
near the entrance to a warehouse. She knewwhat it meant. In the shadows beside
it she could make out the indistinct figures of three men. They stood motionless,
looking towards her and the Doctor. As she got used to the dim light, she could
see what they were wearing – long duster-coats, like hospital attendants. One of
them was holding a small case. As he moved under a street light she could make
out what he took from it. It glinted in the light, a hypodermic syringe.

The men moved forwards towards them, and she deliberately turned her
back on them. She didn’t need to are them close in, as she was aware of every
movement. She gave a little nod, a signal – moving her head to indicate the
Doctor, backing away a step or two to leave him isolated. He was oblivious of
any danger.

She was conscious that the men camewithin twenty yards, then they backed
into the shadows.

Dodo knew what was expected of her.



‘You know, Doctor,’ she said. ‘Polly and Ben have gone off in the wrong
direction. The taxi rank is the other way.’

‘Are you sure?’ he asked.
‘Positive. I’ve seen three go past.’
‘Very well,’ the Doctor agreed. ‘We mustn’t be any later. Lead the way.

I’ll follow.’
They set off down the darkened pavement.
The leader of the three men saw them turn.
‘We’ll pick up Polly on the way back,’ said Dodo casually as she walked

on smartly.
‘As you say,’ the Doctor agreed. He had his doubts, but Dodo seemed to be

quite sure and, after all, London was her city. They hurried on.
He stopped sharply. Someone shouted to him. ‘Doctor!’ called Ben.
A taxi pulled up beside the Doctor.
‘Here we go!’ said Ben. He and Polly jumped out. ‘We saw this one coming

up, and this gentleman doesn’t need it.’
They handed a grandly-dressed little man out of the cab. His overcoat was

too long, his shoes were tied with string, his hair was matted, and all about him
spoke of the streets of London – a lifetime of tramping those streets, and sleeping
underneath arches.

‘It’s all yours, guv,’ said the tramp grandly. ‘Welcome to it.’ He was
clutching a large parcel. Probably all his worldly possessions, thought the
Doctor. ‘First time I ever took a taxi anyhow. But it was a celebration. "Case
dismissed". So I stay out of jug.’ The tramp gave a wave and set off. Tata, then!’
he called over his shoulder.

‘Not so blooming fast, mate,’ shouted the taxi-driver. ‘What about the fare?’
‘Change a tenner?’ asked the tramp.
‘Not likely.’
‘Hold on,’ said Polly. ‘I’ve got change. I’ll fix it.’ ‘Thanks, miss,’ said the

driver. ‘Hop it, mate,’ he added in the tramp’s direction. Then he turned to the
Doctor. ‘Right, guv. Where to?’

‘Ah. Let me see. This address.’ The Doctor showed a card to the driver, and
was suddenly aware that Dodo was no longer with him.

‘Dodo... Dodo... Are you coming?’
Dodomoved back reluctantly. Chance had forestalled her. She could see the

patches of shadow, unmoving, waiting further down the alleyway. There was no
way of getting the Doctor to head down that path now. She climbed into the cab.

Polly followed. ‘Where are you staying, Ben?’ she asked.
‘There’s a Services Club not far off. I’ll walk.’
‘Meetme tomorrow at themain desk in the Post Office Tower,’ added Polly,

‘and I’ll stand you lunch.’ Ben looked at her cynically. ‘I’m no deb’s delight,
you know.’

‘I can see that,’ said Polly drily.
‘Thanks. I’ll be there,’ Ben grinned. He called ‘Goodnight’ to the Doctor

and Dodo as they drove off. The tramp was still standing at his elbow. ‘You got
a bed for the night?’ Ben asked him.

‘You might not call it a bed,’ said the tramp cautiously, ‘but it’s a blooming
sight better than what I’ve been used to in my time.’



‘Oh yes?’
The tramp pointed across the wide expanse of Covent Garden, now silent

and gloomy. ‘See that warehouse? Got a faulty lock on the side door. I’ll doss
down there after I’ve had a spot of grub.’

Ben watched him shuffle off into the shadows. He couldn’t help admiring
the resilience and independence of the man, then he headed for the brighter
streets of the city.

The tramp didn’t notice the man in the phone box as he shambled past, nor
did he hear anything that was said.

‘Reporting from outside the warehouse,’ said theman. He spoke in the same
impersonal voice that Brett and Krimpton had used. ‘Dodo failed to deliver...
Yes, she tried, but was prevented, and they’ve gone off in a taxi... Yes, I
understand... We will do as you say.’

The truck stood just outside the phone box. As the man came out he
signalled to those waiting in the shadows. They joined him and began to unload
the truck, carrying crate after crate into the building. The work was exhausting,
but they neither hesitated nor flagged. It was as though something of a
mechanical character had entered their beings.



6. Working for the Cause

It was only in a vague, impersonal way that Brett realised the nonstop flow
of energy that seemed to be at his command. He had worked continuously for
hours, planning, designing, organising, according to the instructions – silent,
unspoken, but absolutely detailed and meticulous – that he knew were being
transmitted to him by Wotan.

The same ceaseless activity could have been observed in those around him.
They were at the top of their power –intellects functioning as never before; all
senses on the alert, aware of dangers, dealing with them, somehow knowingwhat
his companions were planning, and slotting in as required. They were a vast,
powerful, dedicated mechanism, at work in the warehouse which Wotan had
selected from a mass of data. Brett now took for granted the speed of Wotan’s
decisions, but it had staggered him at first. Calculations were instantaneous; the
preparation was formidable. Plans were executed at speed. The only delay was
the human element. No matter how hard teams of workers laboured, they were
limited by their potential. Progress would be better, Brett knew, when the
machines were ready to take over, and human labour could be disposed of. Very
soon, he guessed, his own usefulness would be finished. Far more effective
machines would take over the planning and scientific contribution which he was
doing his utmost to supply. Brett viewed the prospect without emotion. It was
as things were devised. It would be proper for him to be discarded when the
machines he was helping to create were ready to take control. The cause would
be accomplished so much quicker, and with far more skill and intellect. He was
content to serve his purpose in Wotan’s world.

Brett stood in the huge warehouse and surveyed the state of things in that
world. What had recently been a storage space for the market was now
transformed into a highly technical workshop. All around, the contents of a
nonstop supply of crates were being distributed and assembled. A collection of
some of the most accomplished scientists had been assembled, and were now
working with a dedication they had none of them experienced before.

Brett had kept control on all progress up to this point. He wondered when
the knowledge required would be beyond him. But at present he was able to
examine the carefully prepared blue-prints, and delegate work to the teams on
hand.

Hemoved through the Store Room. It was like going through a hive of bees,
or an anthill. No one deviated from his function. The individual was a means
to an end.

He stopped by a group around a mechanical structure. The leading scientist
joined him.

Brett indicated the prints. ‘Follow in exact detail. The outer sections are
being prepared elsewhere. Welding of the casing has begun.’

On the other side of the room a vast welding machine was belching forth a
blaze of sparks. Team after team of welders took over the work.

The scientist inspected the prints carefully. It was not work in which he had
specialised before, but somehow he understood.



Brett moved on. It was his concern to keep the pressure going.
He stopped by the next group. ‘Electronic sections are to be assembled in

this order,’ he instructed. The group examined the new instructions, and returned
silently to work.

It was some time later that night when the tramp returned to Covent Garden
as he had told Ben he would do. He’d managed to eat well that evening, and he
had drunk even better. He was a little unsteady as he made his way under the
arcades and stopped to get his bearings. Nothing looked quite the same as it had
done a few hours earlier.

But he was almost sure where he was. This was indeed the warehouse in
which he had spent the previous night. But there was something different.

‘They’ve painted out the number,’ he muttered, screwing up his eyes to
concentrate.

With his usual caution when taking up residence, he moved towards the
door at the side of the building, passing a parked truck at the kerbside.

He had edged the door open before he heard anything, then–what was it?
A faint noise like machinery? A distant humming – the sense of hushed, intense
activity? He was incredulous, and gently eased his way into the darkened
corridor. The noise persisted; he was drawn towards it. The place had been empty
the night before. What was happening?

The welders wore protective masks as they worked through a shower of
sparks. Shadows danced on the walls around them. From time to time a man
would collapse under the strain of continuous activity, but another would take
his place. They were all expendable.

The ant-heap around them never relaxed. The concentration was awesome.
And from where he stood – just outside the inconspicuous door at the back of
the store room–the tramp was indeed overcome with awe.

He didn’t know what to make of it. The transformation was so complete
that he wondered whether he had come to a different place. Perhaps he had drunk
even more than he had thought.

But no... he recognised the high rafters that crossed the roof. He saw stacked
against the wall the crates and boxes he had seen the night before. He even
recognised the piles of sacking in a corner he had used to keep warm.

This was his warehouse, all right. But what was this bizarre vision – this
crackling of electronics, this hum of computers, dynamos, the shower of sparks
in the corner, dancing shadows on the walls? It was a picture out of hell, and
he froze on the spot. There were a couple of hundred devils at work here. But
what were they doing?

A man moved through the crowd. He called out, ‘Hurry! Time is short.
Take over when necessary. This prototype must be completed by dawn. It is to
be programmed by Wotan... Nothing must be allowed to –’

He broke off as an oscillation echoed through the room. The sound rose
and fell, grating on the ears. There was an urgency about it. The meaning was
undoubted.

‘Close all doors!’ shouted Brett. ‘Electronic locks to be activated.’
A tremor went through the work force. The rhythm was shaken – then the

moment passed and work was in full flow again.
‘Security on duty,’ called Brett.



A number of men seemed to appear from nowhere. They looked, to the
tramp, to be identical. The man called out again, ‘There is an intruder amongst
us.’

It was impossible for anyone to have seen him – the tramp knew that. But
he was sobered with fear. He wanted to turn and run, but he couldn’t move.

A small knot of men clustered round an instrument in the centre of the
room. One of them was taking measurements. He called out, ‘The intruder is
in the North Section. He is static, at two hundred and seventy degrees from the
detector.’

A wave of adrenalin swept through the tramp. They must be on to him! Not
that he was doing any harm. Besides, he had more right than they had to be there.
He had squatter’s rights. He’d staked a claim the day before. But now the blood
was back in his veins, and he was determined to run.

He hurried back to the side door. Unaccountably it wouldn’t budge. He
sweated to pull it open, but something held it rigid. He knew there was a second
door in the warehouse. It meant crossing part of the store room, but there was
nothing else for it. He saw the little group of men advancing on him, and made
a dash for it. He got halfway across the room, but it was hopeless. He tried to
control his voice, but it shook as he called out, ‘Look. if you’re the Law, I’m
clean. Stands to reason, I have to be – I’ve just come out... a couple of weeks
ago... You’ve got nothing on me!’

The group of men had stopped. They didn’t appear to understand what he
was telling them.

‘Well, if you ain’t the Law, it’s all right with me. Live and let live, I say. I
don’t give a cuss what you’re doing here. None of my business... I’ll just move
on.. find another place to doss.’ He gave a brave wave of the hand. "Night, all,’
he called.

‘Cover the door,’ ordered Brett.
The group fanned out in a half-circle, moving slowly but relentlessly. The

outcome was never in doubt. ‘What kind of a welcome is this?’ pleaded the
tramp. ‘When a bloke’s just out of jug... They won’t get a word out of me.’ He
turned to Brett. ‘I promise you, guv.’

He was panic-stricken. He tried to back off. He was up against the wall..
‘What’s this then? A ruddy madhouse? What’s going on? What are you,

anyhow?’
No one bothered to reply.
‘Keep off. Get your ‘ands off... Get back... Get away fromme!’ The last was

little more than a shriek. The knot of men surrounded him as he shook the handle
of the door. He was out of vision as far as the central computer was concerned.
The eye-line was obscured, but the noise abruptly diminished – the wail of the
alarm stopped dead – the baleful revolving lights faded and a soft glow filled the
room. The group dispersed. It was as though nothing had happened.

Everyone was studiously back at work.
‘Repeat,’ said Brett, ‘I repeat... Prototype to be completed by dawn..’
Breakfast with Sir Charles Summer was an opportunity for the Doctor to

catch up with the news of the day. Passing through so many Time Zones made
it difficult to pinpoint just exactly what period of Time – historically – one was



in. His mind adjusted automatically, but he felt more at ease when he’d glanced
through the newspapers for the last few weeks.

It was a rare occasion for the Doctor to have breakfast at all, much less a
full English breakfast. It took his digestive system a day or two to adjust to the
differences between planets and centuries.

But he had to admit that he had enjoyed his kippers, poached eggs, toast,
marmalade, and endless cups of tea. The process came to a full stop as he flipped
through the pages of one of the later editions of the morning paper.

‘Good gracious!’ said the Doctor.
‘What is it, Doctor?’ asked Sir Charles.
His guest laid the paper on the table before them. ‘Look at that,’ said the

Doctor.
Sir Charles frowned over the item. ‘It appears a tramp has been found dead

not far from Covent Garden.’
‘Precisely,’ said the Doctor. ‘Found in a gutter at three o’clock.’ He looked

thoughtful. ‘I can’t remember exactly what the time was when we last saw him.’
‘You know the man?’ Sir Charles raised his eyebrows.
‘We met last night for the first time,’ said the Doctor. ‘Or rather this

morning... We took his taxi to come here.’
‘What an extraordinary coincidence.’ But Sir Charles was not particularly

concerned. He read aloud, ‘The police appear to believe it was a road accident.’
‘I suppose that’s possible,’ said the Doctor.
‘You doubt it?’
‘I’m sure I don’t know.’ The Doctor frowned again. He was assailed by

doubts.
‘Besides,’ went on Sir Charles, ‘I would like your advice on a very real

problem which has cropped up.’ ‘Certainly.’
Sir Charles handed two letters to the Doctor. ‘These arrived this morning.

Both letters of resignation, and both from absolutely splendid scientists in my
Faculty.’

The Doctor read them through. ‘H’mm. No reason given in either, I see.’
‘That’s the strange thing,’ nodded Sir Charles. ‘Two of my best men.’
The Doctor noted that both letters were written in a similar style, but he

said nothing.
‘I’ve been unable to get in touch with them,’ added Sir Charles. ‘No one

appears to have seen them since last night. Extraordinary, isn’t it? Two first-
class scientists suddenly vanish.’

The Doctor looked thoughtfully at Sir Charles. ‘Now I wonder... Do you
suppose... I mean, if... No, I don’t suppose you would.’

Both men turned as Polly knocked and carne into the room.
‘I hope I’m not late,’ she said breathlessly.
‘Late for what?’ Sir Charles was puzzled.
‘For work,’ said Polly. ‘If you show me where your secretary has her desk,

I’ll start at once.’
‘I don’t follow,’ said Sir Charles.
‘ButMajor Green toldme to get round here as quickly as possible. Professor

Brett won’t need me today. I understood your secretary was ill.’



‘Actually she is away today. But I don’t see how Brett or anyone else could
have known about it.. But I’ll be glad of your help. Her office is through there.
I’ll join you shortly.’

‘Right.’ Polly turned to the Doctor. ‘How is Dodo this morning?’
‘Here she is now,’ said the Doctor. ‘She’ll tell you herself.’
Dodo had just walked into the room.
‘I’m fine,’ said Dodo. She sounded a little cool. ‘Isn’t it time you began

work?’
Polly raised her eyebrows. ‘Sorry I asked,’ she said as she went out.
‘I hope I haven’t kept you waiting, Doctor,’ said Dodo.
‘Not at all,’ said the Doctor, surprised. It was unlike Dodo to be so curt with

anyone. He turned to Sir Charles. ‘Sorry I can’t help you with your problem. I’m
rather out of touch these days.’

Sir Charles was still thumbing through his letters. ‘It won’t be easy to fill
their places. Men of this quality are hard to find. Especially with their high level
of computer knowledge.’

‘Computers?’ The Doctor looked at him sharply. ‘The man who could help
you there is surely Professor Brett,’ said Dodo unexpectedly.

‘That’s true,’ agreed Sir Charles.
‘We could call round and see him now,’ she suggested to the Doctor.
‘I thought you wanted to show me London,’ he said. ‘This sounds much

more important,’ she said. ‘That’s very understanding of you, my dear.’ Dodo
was becoming very responsible, mused the Doctor. ‘I’m ready,’ she said
promptly.

But the Doctor hesitated. ‘Perhaps we should make an appointment. Maybe
I should phone him first?’ She agreed quickly. ‘Yes, that would be best.’ ‘Go
ahead. Use the phone,’ said Sir Charles. The Doctor thanked him as he dialled
the number. He heard a voice at the other end of the line. ‘Hello... I’d like to
speak to Professor Brett please... Yes. That’s correct..

In his office, Brett covered the phone with his hand and turned to where
Krimpton was receiving a spate of signals from Wotan.

‘It’s the Doctor... On the line! Feed him through. Direct to Wotan!’
Krimpton operated a switch. A light blazed from the computer. A new

sound emanated from within... a high-pitched whine which was soft at first but
rapidly increased in intensity.

Dodo watched the Doctor expectantly. She knewwhat was about to happen.
She could even hear the high-pitched sound herself.

‘Hello... Hello... ’ He could make no sense of what was happening. There
must be something wrong with the phone.

He held one hand over his other ear... A pain shot through his head... It was
like an electric shock... And yet, try as he might, he could hardly pull the receiver
away from his other ear. It could have been a powerful magnet.

With all his strength, the Doctor managed to throw it aside. He staggered
under the impact. The force sent him tumbling to the floor.

Dodo hid her triumph by running to the table and pouring a glass of water.
‘Are you all right, Doctor?’ He waved the glass aside as Sir Charles helped him
to his feet.

‘I’m all right.’



‘I’ll get the girl to call a doctor,’ said Sir Charles anxiously.
‘No need.’ The Doctor appeared to have recovered. ‘Then take some brandy

at least,’ insisted Sir Charles. He hurried away.
As soon as he had gone Dodo turned to the Doctor comfortingly. ‘Don’t be

alarmed,’ she said. ‘This is merely a method of establishing contact... Sometimes
it has to be like this as time is so short.’

The Doctor at by the table, still dazed, unsure he heard her properly.
‘You must know construction has begun already,’ she whispered. ‘You are

needed urgently.’
He was holding his head in his hands; now he looked up. ‘What happened?’
She wanted to reassure him. That way they would be able to get to work

quickly. ‘It’s safe to tell you now, Doctor. You are one of us. One of the advance
guard. We have an enormous honour. My function was to bring you into contact.
Now I shall serve as an assistant until discarded.’

The Doctor pressed his hands against his head. The echo of that infernal
noise still persisted. What on earth was Dodo saying? ‘Whatever are you talking
about, Dodo?’

‘Listen carefully, Doctor. This construction is taking place at several
strategic points in London..’

He interrupted, looking up at her. ‘I’m sorry, Dodo. I don’t think I’m
hearing you properly... My head feels as though it had been struck a terrible
blow, but that’s a little better... Now, what were you saying?’

He was making a great effort to concentrate. Dodo looked at him, overcome
with doubts... Beginning to wonder if he really had... ?

‘But you made the call,’ she said. ‘You made contact, didn’t you?’
‘I certainly contacted something,’ said the Doctor ruefully. ‘Yes, I

remember asking to speak to Professor Brett, then everything seemed to explode.
I was knocked off my feet. It was as if... as if..

‘What, Doctor?’ She had to know how much he might have guessed.
‘I can’t explain. But as if something enormous and terribly powerful had

nearly consumed me... nearly absorbed me.’
She looked at him, shocked. So he had not been consumed or absorbed... as

she and all the others had been. He was still himself – still alien to their cause.
The Doctor was speaking, trying to clarify his feelings. ‘I know it sounds

ridiculous... Perhaps the telephone line is at fault. Something as simple as that..
An ordinary, or rather an extraordinary, electric shock.’

She had to be sure. ‘You received no instructions?’ He peered at her. ‘My
dear child! Instructions from whom?’

‘From... from... ’ Her mind seemed to come to a stop.
Sir Charles hurried in with a glass and decanter. ‘Have a tot of this.’
‘Thank you.’ The Doctor took a couple of sips. ‘Well, Sir Charles, either

your phone is badly out of order or... ’ He frowned.
‘Or what?’ asked Sir Charles.
‘I hesitate to think.’ The Doctor looked round quickly to see Dodo about to

slip out of the room. ‘Stay where you are, Dodo!’ he called.
The door to the office opened and Polly looked out. ‘Is something the

matter?’



‘I believe there is,’ said the Doctor grimly. ‘A new and very deadly danger
threatens all of us. And it seems to originate from Professor Brett’s office.’

‘Impossible,’ said Polly. ‘That’s where I work.’
‘I don’t follow,’ said Sir Charles. ‘I don’t understand.’
The Doctor spoke almost to himself. ‘I don’t think any of us do as yet.’
Dodo remained motionless at the door. Now he called her over. She moved

towards him slowly, almost reluctantly, as though a strugglewere going on inside
her.

‘Sit down, my child,’ said the Doctor, and she obeyed him.
For a moment he held her head in his hands and stared into her eyes. The

others looked on.
‘As I suspected,’ said the Doctor, ‘she’s in some sort of trance. A form

of hypnotism, very deep-seated... fundamental. I can’t say I have seen before
anything as powerfully destructive of the personality. But... ’ he shrugged, ‘we
can but try.’

He passed his fingers over her brow, seeming to seek out nerve centres.
Then he put pressure on the sides of her head.

‘Listen to me, child,’ he said. ‘I want you to repeat "I am Dodo Chaplet...
I am able to resist all attempts to transform me into someone – or something–
else."’

It was an enormous effort for the girl, but she spoke slowly, painfully,
repeating what the Doctor had said. ‘I shall count to five,’ said the Doctor, ‘and
when I finish counting you will go to sleep. When you awake, you will have
forgotten all about this – er – distressing affair.’

The onlookers weren’t sure whether she had heard. ‘I shall start counting.
One... two... three.. Dodo’s eyes began to close.

‘Four... five..
Her head fell forward and she was heavily asleep. The Doctor examined

her for a moment. ‘She will sleep for about forty-eight hours... After that she
must have a complete rest... She has gone through a traumatic experience... And
survived, I am happy to say.’

‘And you’re sure she’s going to be all right?’ asked Polly.
‘She will be her old self again,’ said the Doctor. ‘Thank goodness for that.’

Polly took a deep breath. ‘I feel it was my fault. I should have looked after her
better.’

Neither man noticed as she left the room.
‘I tell you what,’ said Sir Charles. ‘I’ll arrange for Dodo to be taken down

to my place in the country. My wife will be glad to look after her.’
‘That’s very kind of you.’ The Doctor looked at the face of the sleeping

girl. ‘Take good care of her. She has been a very brave and loyal friend.’
Sir Charles nodded. He turned to call for Polly. ‘Now where has that girl

gone?’ Life, in the eyes of Sir Charles, was full of the unexpected.
The Doctor stood by Dodo, watching her closely, as though trying to read

a secret.
‘She said something,’ he mused. ‘Something about the strategic points in

London... I wonder what she meant.’
Sir Charles shook his head. It was all beyond him...



7. A Demonstration of Power

The strategic points were varied, and they had been in use, most of them,
for several hours.

At London Airport a uniformed group of menmerged with the general staff,
using trucks, loaders, workshops, acting as security patrols, and going about
official business with great efficiency.

The central railway stations also had inconspicuous individuals close to
positions of control. Even some of the city’s famous buildings appeared to have
an influx of new workers, unchallenged after the first few encounters with the
authorities.

It was a silent, bloodless takeover which included the Television Centre of
the BBC, radio stations, and other centres of communication and transport.

There were never many of such anonymous strangers, but always sufficient
to take the reins into their own hands. Such preparations drew little attention to
themselves, but they were continuous. Londonwas being prepared for an assault.

The warehouse at Covent Garden was by no means the only one to be
working flatout that morning, but it was the first into production.

Inside, the first machine was taking shape, and was remarkable in its
resemblance to the human form. A small square ‘head’ now topped the massive
body. In this way it was similar to Wotan. Perhaps that was why the model was
turning out as it was – Wotan had been designed by man... influenced by his
own experience, and Wotan in turn had devised a generation close to its own
experience. Even as he worked, Brett guessed that future generations would
create other forms for themselves, less and less like their originators.

But he had no time for such speculation. He was involved with the new
functions that Wotan had produced. This machine – the War Machine, as it was
coded – had amobile base. It hadwheels which it had power to direct and control.
This gave it great flexibility for such a heavy structure.

The other aspect that Brett noted with the any fragment of his mind that
seemed to remain his own, was that although the body of the machine was not
complete, the ‘head’ was alive! It was functioning, thinking, instructing, turning
from left to right, observing balefully, shining its blinding beams of light,
dazzling all those on whom it turned, even as they worked to complete the whole.
It was an uncanny feeling to be putting together the creature – if creature it was
– while the thing was already alive in so many of its parts. Deep within, the
computer existed like a nervous system, throbbing with an energy and power
that even Wotan could not match.

Brett was no longer capable of rational thought; he followed the flow of
blue-prints that arrived from his own office, his energy unflagging.

There were sections under development about which Brett knew nothing.
Like all those around, he obeyed orders, and he stood aside as Major Green
waved away the rest of the work force. The Major carried a short, squat object
which looked like an automatic shotgun. After all, that would be something the
Major would understand.



‘Stand back!’ shouted the Major. ‘Destructive mechanism to be fitted for
testing.’

The mechanism fitted exactly into the War Machine. Everything came
together with a mathematical precision which Brett noted with approval. The
arms of the Machine were able to turn the weapon at any angle.

‘Prepare for demonstration,’ called the Major.
The group around theMachine parted as the weaponwas raised and sighted.

They looked on, impassively. A short distance away another worker stacked
crates against a wall. He heard the Major’s order and began to move away.

‘Stay where you are!’ called the Major. ‘And stand still.’
The man made no protest. He faced the Machine as it adjusted its sights.
The Major read an instrument before him. ‘Bearing 52 degrees. Distance

thirty feet. Elevation five feet ten inches. Impact to be fatal.’
The Machine flashed and crackled a spate of signals. ‘Aim adjusted,’ said

the Major. ‘Results to be logged.. Test... Fire!’
There was a flash of white light, and a faint, dull explosion.
The man against the wall slowly slid to the ground. ‘Effective at thirty feet,’

said the Major.
There was an urgent message for both Brett and Krimpton. They were to

return to Brett’s office. They stood before Wotan as the computer rattled out a
single question... Where was the Doctor?

‘We have had no word from the girl,’ said Brett.
‘She may have failed again,’ said Krimpton.
‘Other means must be used,’ Wotan burst forth. ‘The Doctor is essential.

Failure is not permitted nor tolerated.’
There was the sound of the outer door opening. ‘That could be the girl.’

Brett opened the door. Polly hurried in, A look of relief lit up her face as she saw
Brett. ‘Thank goodness you’re here, Professor,’ she said. ‘Something very odd
has been happening. Are you all right?’

Brett moved behind her and closed the door.
Shewas aware of something strange about the twomen. Theymoved stiffly,

their eyes were blank. She was suddenly very frightened.
‘We must destroy in order to protect,’ said Krimpton, as though he were

repeating a lesson. Brett was locking the door.
The Doctor watched Dodo being driven away, still asleep as if drugged, and

then returned to the house. He was surprised to find a visitor.
‘Bless my soul, it’s Ben! How did you know I was here?’
The sailor looked worried; the cockney sparkle had gone. ‘Hope you don’t

mind me turning up, Doctor, but I had this appointment to meet Polly.
Lunchtime, she said. ‘Course she might have thought better of it, and just given
me the elbow.’

‘She didn’t keep the appointment?’
‘She didn’t. And they told me at the Post Office Tower that she’d come

here.’
‘She’s already left,’ the Doctor told him. ‘This is something I feared.’
‘Something wrong, Doc?’ He glanced round. ‘No sign of Dodo?’
‘Dodo has gone to the country for a few days’ rest. I am no longer worried

about her. It’s Polly who might need your help.’



‘’Course she might have gone upmarket and doesn’t want to know me in
the light of day.’

‘I doubt that,’ said the Doctor. He picked up the morning paper and handed
it to Ben. ‘Have you seen this?’

He glanced at it. ‘Yes, I thought it was the old fellow we met last night. Bit
of a coincidence. What’s that got to do with Polly?’

‘I’m not sure it has anything to do with her... but it may have. Indeed, it
may have something to do with a greater problem.’ He hesitated. ‘I wonder if
you’d like to help me, my boy?’

‘Spell it out, Doctor.’
‘You remember when we left that club last night?’
‘Yes.’
‘I seem to remember the poor fellow was still with you as we drove off?’
‘Right,’ said Ben. ‘I asked him if he had a bed and he pointed to this

warehouse. Said he had a place to doss down there.’
‘Do you think you could find it?’
‘Certain I could.’
‘This might be dangerous,’ warned the Doctor. ‘Spice of life,’ grinned Ben.

He was beginning to enjoy himself.
‘Vary dangerous,’ added the Doctor.
‘I’ll watch it,’ Ben nodded.
‘I’d like you to have a look round there. A little investigation. Don’t attract

attention... and take care.’
Ben grinned again. ‘Will do, Doc.’
He didn’t lose any time, leaving the Doctor poring over a sheaf of

documents, plans, photos and information about the Post Office Tower and the
research that went on there. He was already putting together the pieces of a
jigsaw, and the picture grew more alarming.

Ben was surprised to find the area round the warehouse so sparsely
populated. It was almost like a no-go area. The truck which had been parked
there the night before was still in position. The only people he saw were a couple
of men, hanging about, apparently doing nothing. Ben read the signs. They were
on guard... but guarding what?

He walked casually by, went down an alleyway, made sure he wasn’t
watched, then doubled back.

The tramp had said there was a side door. Ben slipped into the little
courtyard that backed onto the buildings. It was stacked with boxes, rubbish,
rotting vegetables.

The side door was hidden by the litter, but he found it. As he began to open
it, he heard a strange sound from within. He tried to make out what it could be...
A clanking noise, probably mechanical... and the hum of something electronic,
reminding him of a ship’s engine.

There were also voices, a subdued mutter, as though many people were
speaking very quietly. It was an eerie feeling to be standing at that door, listening.

He pushed the door gently, and it swung in slightly. He could hear quite
clearly.

A man called out, ‘Silence... Stand by... Fire..



A burst of faint explosions followed – not like any gunfire that Ben had ever
heard before. Hewas startled. The Doctor had warned him it might be dangerous,
but what was this? He moved cautiously into the darkened corridor. Another
door lay ahead.

Major Green recorded the pattern of the weapon. It was almost perfect.
The War Machine sprayed shot along the stack of crates. The results were
devastating. Its range increased with each test. Metals were shattered. ‘Stand by
for tests on arm action!’ The Major wasn’t sure what the tests would be, for by
now the Machine had begun to take over its own decision-making.

‘Demonstrate power of body,’ the Major ordered. He was as shaken as the
other onlookers as the Machine lifted its massive arms aloft and brought them
down with a crash on the heavy table beside it. It splintered like a matchbox.

‘Test satisfactory,’ the Major managed to record. ‘Sight testing,’ he called.
Front where he stood, peering through the tiny opening in the door, Ben

looked on, transfixed.
The head-like section of the strange contraption was beginning to rotate

from side to side. The rays of light from two positions like eye sockets passed
across the warehouse as a lighthouse might throw its beams. As it flamed across
the door Ben just had time to pull back out of sight.

He heard the man calling, ‘Eyesight to be improved. Distance insufficient.’
Ben opened the door – a tiny crack – and saw the Machine. It was

undergoing a change. The throb of inner power increased; energy seemed to be
generated to an explosive point.

‘Movement test!’ called the Major.
The noise from the dynamo reached an intensity that filled the room. Ben

felt his head; the pressure had become painful. The Machine began to shake...
and then of its own accord it started to move... Slowly at first... very slowly.
Then with increasing speed, greater assurance. sudden power... A great surge of
something like arrogance, it seemed to Ben. It was alive! TheMachine had taken
over control of itself. He saw with his own eyes what had happened, but could
not believe it! He was startled, incredulous!

The Machine continued its circle round the warehouse, knocking aside
anything that came into its path, careless of all before it. People scattered as it
approached, sweeping through the crowd, ignoring those who had constructed
it– its eyes growing brighter, beginning to blaze, dazzling those caught in its
beams, like rabbits in a car’s headlights.

It went faster, starting to turn and twist, to experiment with new powers,
doubling back on itself, and then discovering a fresh sense– the need to play
games. It raced forward, scattering a knot of men, turned and harried one of them,
following the man as he scrambled away... Jerking back and forward, teasing the
now desperate man it had marked down as its quarry. In his panic he stumbled
and fell. He managed to roll aside as the Machine sped after him. But the
mechanism was up to such manoeuvres; it could change its course instantly. The
man on the ground saw it coming. Perhaps it would have laughed, had laughter
been programmed into it. As it was, it merely rolled forward... Testing... testing...

Ben couldn’t see what happened, but he heard the scream, and was aware of
the silence that followed. After that the Machine slowed down a little, sweeping
a pile of crates to the floor, and rolling through the debris.



Undoubtedly the test programme had been a success as well.
Ben wasn’t sure how long he stood just beyond the door, the tiny opening

revealing the bizarre activity beyond. His brain seemed to have come to a stop;
he was stunned. It didn’t occur to him to turn and run.

What he was witnessing was so incredible... so impossible. Not even a
dream...

TheMachine came to a halt in the centre of the room. The head spun slowly
round, the light from the eyes flickered irregularly, sweeping round the crowded
warehouse as though seeking someone. Then it broke into a high, wavering
sound.

The Major hurried foward. He snatched up a number of messages – slips
that spilled to the ground. An alarm bell sounded.

For a second or two it did not occur to Ben that this turmoil had anything
to do with him, then he was aware of his own danger. He backed towards the
outer door.

He didn’t notice the figure standing in the dark behind him.
Someone had entered from the street, and stood watching in silence.
The Major shouted, ‘Warning! There is a stranger amongst us. He must be

found at once. Begin searching!’ Ben had moved just in time.
He turned and was face to face with Polly!
‘Polly! What are you doing here?’ He couldn’t disguise his alarm.
She was calm and collected. ‘I came to look for you.’ ‘Did the Doctor tell

you I was here?’
She hesitated for a second. ‘Yes.’
She took a step towards the warehouse door. Ben grabbed her arm. ‘Don’t

go in there!’
‘Why?’
‘We must get away from here.’ He couldn’t explain now.
But she didn’t move.
‘Quickly,’ he whispered. ‘I’ve got to report back to the Doctor.’
‘What’s in there?’ she asked. He thought she was unusually placid – not at

all like she had been the day before.
‘I can’t tell you,’ he said. ‘You wouldn’t believe it.’ She didn’t seem

impressed, and pushed his arm aside as she headed for the door.
Ben pulled her back. ‘Listen! Keep out of there. This way, Polly. Come on!’
She asked ‘Why?’ in the same dull, flat voice.
He was exasperated. ‘Because it’s a ruddy madhouse in there! It’s packed

with people who have gone off their heads! They’re brainwashed, or hypnotised,
or something!’

‘You saw them?’
‘I’m telling you!’
‘What else did you see?’ She was quite unmoved. Ben was bewildered.

‘There’s a sort of machine... Must be one of these computers... but it’s a living
computer! It moves! It’s just killed some poor bloke.. I tell you, Polly. Move
fast. We’ve got to get out of here!’

She was motionless, standing between him and the inner door. The same
man could be heard not far away. ‘The Major,’ said Polly.



‘The intruder is just beyond that door,’ shouted the Major. ‘The bearing is
two hundred and fifteen degrees. He is to be taken at once.’

‘That’s it,’ said Ben. ‘Believe me now... this way. fast!’
‘Power locks on all escape points!’ shouted the Major. ‘He is not to be

allowed to leave the building.’ Ben moved quickly towards the street door. He
thought Polly was following as he saw her hurry after him, but she stopped by
the side of the door and reached up to press a wall button. The door appeared
suddenly magnetised, being pulled flush with the wall. He tried to wrench it
open. It was as rigid as a rock.

For heaven’s sake, Polly! What have you done?’ ‘I have my instructions,’
she said flatly.

He stared at her in the dark beside him, betraying no emotion. ‘What’s
happened to you?’ But he was already guessing the answer.

‘You are not to get away,’ said Polly.
He made a dive for the wall button, but she stood in his way.
She was surprisingly strong, but he threw her aside, and had one hand on

the button when the door behind burst open, and he went down under a heap of
men. He lashed out in desperation, but the odds were against him. And the girl
stood quietly looking on.

‘You don’t know what you’re doing, Polly!’ he shouted. ‘Get the Doctor...
Now... before it’s too late.’

The Major called from the next room. ‘Bring him. The Machine wishes to
deal with him.’

He struggled as they dragged him along the corridor. ‘Get help, Polly! Get
help!’

She followed them into the store room.
The Major stood by the side of the Machine; now he was merely some form

of adjunct... A mouthpiece.. his own individuality quite gone, and dominated by
the structure that towered over him.

‘The intruder has been spying,’ said the Major. ‘Polly!’ A last shout.
She didn’t react... He had a feeling that in a sense she didn’t even hear.



8. The One Who Got Away

The Doctor paced up and down in Sir Charles’s library, while his host
looked on anxiously.

‘Take my advice, Doctor. Try to relax. There’s no point in upsetting
yourself like this.’

‘He should have been back hours ago,’ said the Doctor. ‘I should never
have let him go.’

‘You know what young people are like.’ Sir Charles tried to ease matters.
‘He’s probably quite forgotten your instructions. He could be off doing
something else.’

The Doctor shook his head. ‘Not that young man. He seemed far too
responsible to me. No – if he hasn’t phoned back it’s because he isn’t able to.
Something must have happened.’

‘But what?’
The Doctor didn’t like to speculate.
‘But if you’re really concerned,’ went on Sir Charles, ‘perhaps we should

contact the police.’
‘Using the police at this stage might just drive this menace underground,’

said the Doctor.
Sir Charles had heard all this before, as the Doctor had expressed his fears.
‘But what menace?’ he barked. ‘You can’t tell me what you suspect... And

you can’t show any evidence either! What worries me, Doctor, is that if this sort
of rumour gets out, what is going to happen to our "Switch-On" day? People have
worked for years for this occasion. This type of talk would ruin everything.’ ‘We
may verywell havemore than rumours to contendwith, if we’re not careful,’ said
the Doctor grimly. He began to stride up and down again... ‘Where is that boy!’

Ben found he was looking up at the Machine as though it were a living
being. Although it was the Major at its side who did the talking, it was obvious
who–or what–dominated the scene. They were all subjected to this inhuman
creation. All, except himself, in that packed store room. It was like facing a
judge– or, more exactly, an executioner.

The Major was listing a series of actions, charging him with some new type
of crime.

Ben listened in a daze.
‘You tried to warn human authorities of the work going on in this building,’

intoned the Major. ‘You are clearly an enemy of mechanised evolution.’
It was the first time he had even heard of it, Ben thought.
‘Nothing must prevent Machines from taking over from mankind the

domination of the universe. This is the next stage in the growth of the life-force
on this planet. In order to achieve this, all obstacles are to be destroyed... You
have acted as such an obstacle.’

It was clear that a judgement had been passed. The trial had been conducted
in a few brief moments, and was now over. This was to be a lesson to those
present–although they didn’t need any lessons; they were absolute converts
already.



The Machine began to build up a different sound within, the lights glowed
placidly. Justice was about to take its course. It moved forward slightly – the
heavy arm began to rise.

No one moved or protested – nothing extraordinary was happening.
‘Are you all out of your minds?’ Ben tried to struggle, but he was firmly

held by half a dozen men. ‘Can’t you see what’s happening? It will be your turn
next!’

The Major turned to him. ‘Do you not understand? We are all required by
Wotan... that is our function. When that is complete, of course we may become
redundant. That is fate... as it ought to be. When the tool is no longer of any use,
it is rational to put it aside.’

There was no point in protesting. He was going to be destroyed as a useless
piece of equipment. Yes, machinery was really taking its revenge! It had indeed
turned the tables... Well, there was no point in whining... but he would have liked
to tell the Doctor... That would have shaken the old man!

He was aware that someone had stepped forward from the watching group.
‘What does the girl want?’ asked the Major.
Polly was puzzled to find herself in front of the others, side by side with

this sailor. She didn’t understand what had made her step forward. But she found
herself speaking. ‘I ant the one who trapped this intruder.’

‘That is correct,’ agreed the Major.
‘I did not let him escape.’
‘True.’
‘Wotan requires all the labour we can find,’ she went on. ‘Perhaps it is too

soon to destroy this stranger. Why do we not require him to work first? To help
in this great task, and then to destroy him later?’

‘How are you to know what Wotan would require?’ asked the Major.
The Machine was fractionally subdued. Lights dimmed, the dynamo

hummed softly.
‘I have just come from the offices of Professor Brett. These are his orders.

So they are directives from Wotan.’
There was a moment’s silence.
It seemed an age to Ben.
‘Very well,’ said the Major slowly. ‘He is to work for the time being. He

will work for us now.’ He waved dismissively to the crowd, ‘Time has been
wasted. Return to your tasks... all of you... now.’

The crowd moved quietly away. They resumed what they had been doing.
There had been a hitch, but it was over now. It was as though there had been
no interruption.

'Strewth!’ Ben took a deep breath. ‘That was a close one. Thanks, gal. You
really played them along. You even had me fooled.’

She looked at him coldly. ‘You have been spared. Youmost now show your
gratitude. Work hard for the success of this sacred Cause.’

‘Eh? What cause?’
‘The victory of the War Machines.’
Polly moved back to her work. Ben hesitated a second, then followed suit.

All he could do now, wasn’t it? Lie low. Keep his head down... wait his chance...
If it ever came up!



Both Brett and Krimpton received the directive from Wotan. It came in the
form of a series of signals. ‘All War Machines will be completed and ready by
noon tomorrow. The deadline has been brought forward.’

They repeated the orders to one another, standing in front of Wotan.
‘Machines have been programmed to destroy any human life that opposes

them.’
‘The order to launch the attack comes from Wotan alone.’
‘Covent Garden War Machine is closest to completion. But none are yet

fully developed. They are in the stages of final testing.’
‘All Machines must be under one discipline. They are to attack

simultaneously.’
There was a pause as the two men awaited the next spate of instructions.
‘The object of the attack,’ said Brett, ‘is to occupy the strategic points in

the city. The War Machines are to assume total control over human authority.’
‘By noon tomorrow,’ repeated Krimpton.
The message came through to the warehouse. To achieve the new deadline

the pressure had to be increased. The Machine drove through the room with the
Major in tow, dealing out blows as he saw theworkers around him stagger at their
benches. Those who collapsed made way for others, always standing by. They
were putting together a second and a third structure, each an improvement on
the previous version. The material used became lighter, yet more impenetrable.

‘Such an alloy will take War Machines to the moon,’ the Major informed
those around him. The speed of development was possible as information
flooded from the computers.

It appeared strange to Ben that this vast increase in scientific technology
should depend on such a primitive activity as human labour. These men and
women, staggering under heavy loads, like coolies a hundred years earlier, were
little different to the slaves who built the pyramids. If this was an example of the
benefits of science, he for one could do without it!

But he made a great show of putting his back into his work as the Major
strode by in the wake of theWarMachine, issuing orders, and handing out blows.
‘Faster there! Faster! Anyone who fails to work will be dispensed with.’

Although it was the man who spoke, the words were undoubtedly issuing
from the machine, and Ben made sure he shifted a heavy crate at speed as they
viewed him in passing.

The moment they had gone, he lowered his load, and carefully checked to
see where Polly was.

She worked by herself a few steps away, and looked as though she were
on the point of collapse.

He managed to move closer. ‘You all right?’ he asked.
‘Why do you speak to me?’ she replied coldly.
‘See if you’re all right, girl. You look on your knees to me.’
‘I am well, and happy to work for the triumph of the Machines.’
‘No accounting for tastes,’ muttered Ben. ‘But you’re all-in, love.’
‘That is not important.’
He guessed he wasn’t going to make contact. ‘Oh, sure. Yeah.’
‘The work must now be completed by tomorrow noon,’ said Polly. ‘There

is no time to speak.’



He looked at her sharply. ‘Why noon?’
‘Then the attack begins.’
‘The attack?’
‘The city will be taken over by the Machines.’
‘Oh, that.’ He pretended he knew. ‘And you’re looking forward to it?’
‘Of course.’
He nodded his agreement. ‘On with the job,’ he said, and cautiously looked

round. ‘Taken the guards off the doors, I see,’ he said.
Polly seemed to know what was going on. ‘Naturally. None of us wish to

leave. We don’t need guards. All we wish for is victory.’
‘Good thinking,’ said Ben. ‘Dedicated to our task. An open prison, in a way.

No one wants to leave. No wonder. It’s a real cushy billet here.’
He moved away, humping a crate on his back, and making sure it shielded

him from where the Major kept watch.
‘Explosives to be prepared,’ he was shouting. ‘Collection over here.’
A line of used crates were stacked against the wall. Ben checked them. They

ran parallel to the wall. With a little pushing and shoving he reckoned he could
make a passageway to the door.

He started to edge behind the crates, saw he was seen... stopped, pretended
to be checking... saw he was no longer being observed, and quickly ducked down
out of sight.

He made his way along the wall. Once or twice he had to shift rubble, but
he could still see the door. Freedom from this nightmare was in his grasp.

From where she worked, Polly stood watching the occasional movement
of the crates as Ben forced his way behind them. And when he had to come
from behind cover and make a dash for the door, she saw him, still watching
impassively, hesitating, then returning to her work.

He opened the door just wide enough to slip out, careful not to set off any
alarms again.

The air outside was intoxicating.
The Doctor decided it was time for action. The waiting had been the hardest

thing for him.
‘I’m going myself,’ he informed Sir Charles. ‘But Doctor! What can you

do?’
The Doctor was adamant. ‘After what happened to Dodo I should have

known. I should never have let those young people out of my sight.’
He had opened the front door as the street bell rang. Ben stood in the

doorway. The Doctor was shocked at his appearance.
‘Ben!... Thank goodness!’ The Doctor peered at him. ‘What in heaven’s

name has happened?’
Ben steadied himself. ‘I’m okay,’ he said. ‘It’s Polly and the others we’ve

got to worry about.’
They got him into the house. Even then his words didn’t make much sense.

‘She’s still there, Doc. They’ve got her. Well, at least, he’s got her. Or it’s
probably that machine that’s got her... It’s got all of them. I don’t know how
they’ve done it! Hundreds of people, working to help this killer machine. And
going about it quite cheerful! Signing their own death warrant, most like!’

‘And Polly is one of them?’



‘Too true... Enthusiastic, she is! Not her fault, Doc. She doesn’t know what
she’s doing. None of them do. Not even that ruddy Major. They’re all just
creatures of that flaming machine.’

‘Where is she?’
‘In that warehouse. Where you said. I tell you, Doc, if we don’t stop it, half

of London will cop it.’
Sir Charles had said little. Now he looked at the young sailor as though he

thought him off his head.
There was no letup in the warehouse, although the Major realised from the

signals he received that they were keeping pace with their schedules. Every
second that could be saved was a reward in itself. He was helped in every way
by a battery of instruments and calculators.

It was in checking these instruments that he realised one discrepancy. One
of the workforce was missing. A double check and that missing person was
identified.

He faced Polly. ‘Where is the stranger?’ he demanded.
She stood before him, unresponsive, with an air of puzzlement, genuinely

troubled.
‘You are responsible for him,’ the Major informed her. ‘Where is he?’
In the background the War Machine moved in closer. It recorded the

unease... A grating sound built up from within.
‘Do you know what has happened to him?’ the Major insisted.
Polly couldn’t understand the struggle going on inside her. Her loyalties

should be clear and obvious. She was dedicated to this wonderful work... And
‘Answer!’ the Major ordered.
‘He escaped,’ she said simply.
‘How do you know?’
‘I saw him.’
‘You saw him?’ The Major looked at her blankly. ‘And you didn’t give the

alarm?’
She hesitated. ‘No.’
He tried to understand. ‘Why not?’
‘I don’t know.’
‘He has gone... and you let him go?’
She was unable to understand her own actions. She could think of only one

thing. ‘He was my friend.’
The Major blinked at her. ‘You have no friends,’ he said. ‘You are an

instrument. You work for the Machines!’
She nodded; she agreed. That was correct.
The Major turned to where the Machine had stopped beside him. ‘She has

betrayedWotan,’ he said. ‘She must be punished. She must be returned toWotan
at once.’

As if they had received a signal, two men moved in beside Polly and
escorted her away.

Sir Charles had difficulty in restraining himself. ‘Don’t tell me you believe
this fantastic story, Doctor!’ For some reason the Doctor had been sitting,
listening to this load of rubbish! There must be something wrong with the boy!

‘I’m afraid I do,’ said the Doctor.



‘What! You think there’s a machine, put together by us, by scientists, by
mankind... and it’s came to life! That it’s far in advance of us!’

‘Only intellectually,’ said the Doctor.
Sir Charles didn’t want to continue that line of thought.
‘I had my suspicions before,’ added the Doctor.
‘Oh really, Doctor! The boy’s suffering from some sort of delusion, that’s

all.’
‘Are you sure of that, Sir Charles?’
Well, what else..
‘So you aren’t sure?’
‘It’s impossible! Here? In the heart of London!’ Every second of time that

was wasted was vital, and Ben knew it. He was in despair at the way his report
had been received. Sir Charles thought he was a fool. ‘Look, Doctor! Do
something! It’s happening now! Don’t let’s waste any more time. For a start,
Polly’s there on her own.’

‘This is not a waste of time, my boy. We need Sir Charles. We need his
authority. No one is going to listen to us, or act on our word. Without Sir Charles
we can do nothing.’

Ben turned to the other man. ‘Then every minute that passes is down to you,
guy. They’re putting together an arsenal that could blow up London.’

‘Then why haven’t the police forces been informed?’ ‘I’m informing you
now, ain’t I? What are you going to do about it?’ and when Sir Charles hesitated
Ben went on, ‘I tell you, they were going to do me in. What more proof do you
want? You could be telling the coppers now! And if you don’t, it’ll be on your
head!’

‘The boy is talking sense,’ said the Doctor.
Sir Charles was unconvinced. ‘Well... If you consider it necessary, I’ll have

a word with the Commissioner.’
The Doctor stopped him. ‘Maybe the police are not sufficient for this

situation.’
‘We can leave it to the Commissioner to decide,’ said Sir Charles coolly.

‘How many people did you say there were in this... er... this warehouse?’
‘Could be over a hundred,’ said Ben.
‘All obeying this machine of yours?’
‘Right... And what’s more the girl said something about an attack tomorrow

noon. That should get a few dead-heads moving!’
‘We’ll see... It should be a routine matter to surround the place and arrest a

hundred or so unsuspecting citizens. It’s probably one of those strange religious
cults, or something. Shouldn’t give much trouble.’

‘And who’s doing the arresting,’ asked Ben drily. ‘That’s what the police
are for,’ said Sir Charles. Ben shook his head. ‘That machine will make mince-
meat of them in twenty seconds flat!’

‘Then presumably they’ll call in the army. That should take care of this
famous machine.’

‘I think we may have got our priorities wrong,’ warned the Doctor. ‘It’s
possible there may be more than one machine.’

‘You can bet there are,’ said Ben. ‘They way they’re organised they’ll be
building those things all over the place!’



‘We don’t know where they might be,’ went on the Doctor. ‘It wouldn’t be
possible to find them all by noon tomorrow..

‘What do you suggest?’
‘We should strike at the heart of this matter. We should see what we can

do to incapacitate Wotan.’ ‘That won’t be necessary, I’m sure,’ said Sir Charles
huffily. ‘As far as I can see there is no link-up between Professor Brett’s
magnificent project and this wretched War Machine story.’

‘No link-up!’ Ben jumped up. ‘Cripes! What more do you need? And what
about Polly?’

‘That’s quite enough from you, young man!’ Sir Charles got up angrily to
go. ‘I’ll handle things my own way, if you don’t mind.’ He strode out.

‘What’s he going to do?’ asked Ben.
The Doctor shook his head thoughtfully. ‘I’m afraid we may have upset

him, Ben. The official mind can take in only so much at a time. We will have
to do all we can ourselves.’

The Doctor was already hurrying from the room. Ben raced after him.



9. Attack and Defence

Sir Charles had decided not to take any risks. If there were any truth in this
story, then he was certainly going to cover himself.

He and the Commissioner had a brief but effective conference. The affair
had to be played down, but in case some lunatics were playing games, it was
best to be cautious. They used the old-boy network to bring in – with as little
fuss as possible – elements of the armed forces. ‘Call it a special manoeuvre or
something,’ advised Sir Charles.

The citizens of Londonwere unaware of what was going onwhen the streets
leading to Covent Garden were closed off to both traffic and pedestrians. People
who lived in the district were evacuated. ‘In their own interests... Won’t be for
long... Situation being investigated... Probably everyone will be back before tea.’

But there was some surprise to see a number of armoured vehicles moving
through the streets, and to catch sight of tanks converging on the centre of
London.

Military personnel diverted the traffic. ‘Sorry, an. Don’t know what the
problem is... All traffic turn down towards the Embankment.’ It was a minor
irritation, but not a matter of great concern.

‘Nice work,’ agreed Sir Charles. ‘Play it down.’
He and an army captain were sheltering with the Commissioner under the

arcades of the market. Preparations had been carried out quickly and efficiently.
A system of communication had been set up, with an effective headquarters in
one corner of Covent Garden.

A number of soldiers were already patrolling the area, keeping in touch with
their walkie-talkie radios. After a discussion the captain had set up a machine-
gun position to cover the entrance to the warehouse. Sir Charles prayed that the
whole affair didn’t turn out to be a complete fiasco.

The Captain and Commissioner pored over amap on a field table. ‘We don’t
want anyone slipping away down some back street,’ mid the Commissioner. ‘Not
after bringing us out like this.’

A sergeant came in with a radar chart. ‘We’ve checked these bearings, sir,’
he told the Captain. ‘Seems they intersect here.’

They showed the chart to Sir Charles. ‘We’ve taken a fix on the electronic
signal we’ve been getting,’ explained the Captain. ‘It looks as though it’s
definitely from that building... That’s this warehouse, isn’t it, Sir Charles?’

He had to agree... Confound it! Perhaps something was going on in there,
after all!

The Captain checked through a batch of signals. ‘There’s a whole lot of
radio and electronic activity being picked up from there. Any idea what it is, Sir
Charles?’

‘I’m given to understand there’s a large store of explosives.’
‘That can’t be it,’ said the Captain.
‘And there’s talk of a dangerous War Machine undergoing tests in there...

though how much truth there is in that I don’t know.’
‘Who’s in there?’



‘We don’t know that, either.’
‘Well, they won’t get for anyhow,’ said the Captain. ‘We’ve got platoons

covering the back of the building, and my lads are at each end of the Market,
covering roads in and out.’

‘We’d better see what’s going on,’ suggested Sir Charles. ‘How about
sending in some of your men?’ It’s all arranged, sir,’ said the Captain. ‘There’s a
squad standing by. Just give us the word, and they’ll go in and have a look round.’

Sir Charles hesitated. The affair had turned out to be more serious than he
had expected. That old Doctor fellow had been close to the mark in some of
the things he had predicted. He hoped that he wasn’t going to be right about
everything. ‘This might be a little more dangerous than one thinks,’ he said.

The Captain remained cheerful. ‘My lads can handle it.’
‘Very well,’ said Sir Charles. ‘If you’re ready we’ll go ahead.’
‘Right, Sergeant,’ called out the Captain. ‘This is it. Stage one... let them

know.’
The sergeant spoke over his field radio. ‘Calling Orange patrol... calling

Orange patrol... Your objective number one... Reconnoitre and report... Repeat...
Report before taking any further action. Go ahead... Out.’

Orange patrol was led by a corporal, but they were in good hands. He had
had active service in a couple of rough spots in his time, and his men had
confidence in him. They followed him into the little yard that flanked the
building.

‘Orange patrol calling,’ the corporal reported over his transmitter. ‘No sign
of anyone in the area... There’s a door ahead. Goes into the main building... Do
we go in?’

‘Do they go in?’ the Captain asked Sir Charles. ‘Can’t see why not,’ said
Sir Charles.

The Captain took up the transmitter. ‘Go through the entire building. Take
your time. You never know what you might run into, so be ready for anything.’

‘Proceeding as instructed,’ said the Corporal. He pushed open the door.
It wasn’t locked, and that somehow seemed a good sign. The rest of his party
followed him into the little corridor that lay beyond. It was dark, but that didn’t
present any problems. It was also very quiet. The Corporal had been given to
understand that there could be quite a number of people in this place... But at
this rate it didn’t seem likely.

The advantage Major Green had over these military intruders was that he
was able to watch their approach – in fact, their every action – on the instruments
on the panel before him. He whispered into a microphone beside him and his
voice was picked up by no one except the War Machine– silent and motionless
– at his side.

‘They are twenty-three metres from us. Eleven men in the short corridor...
They are armed but only with current weapons... ’ He seemed to be getting a
message for he nodded. ‘I understand... No one is to move... They are to be
allowed in..

The Corporal could see little point in wasting time, but he was cautious...
Experience had taught him to be... And he opened the door ahead as gently as
though it might be a booby-trap.



A stack of crates had been piled up on the other side of the door, and there
was no way of seeing what was beyond them until the entire squad was in the
room.

Then the crates collapsed and the warehouse lay before them, a massive
workshop, packed with men and women who looked at them with blank
hostility... The air smelt of smoke, chemicals, hot metals... The noise that broke
out stunned them, but most of all they were staggered to see the huge, heavily-
plated piece of machinery, grotesquely resembling a man– a deformed primitive
man – which turned blinding rays of light on them, as though from its eyes, and
which generated a strange and increasingly threatening sound from within. It
reached a pitch at which it began to move forward... to drive over debris,
plunging through the crowd in its path... There was no mistaking its quarry. The
thing was bearing down on them... a tank of sons... terrifying in its shape and
size...

‘Warning! Warning!’ shouted the Major. ‘The intruders are here!’
‘Strike a light!’ The Corporal felt he was rooted to the spot. ‘It’s real!’
The War Machine rolled forward.
‘Attack!’ shouted the Major. ‘Destroy the strangers! They are our enemy.

None must escape! Cover all exits... Stand aside... Test fire... Test fire!’
The heavy arms of the Machine swung upwards. The Corporal saw it

coming and moved fast. ‘Knock it out, lads! All you’ve got!’ He was the first
to fire, his automatic spraying across the metallic body. He might as well have
tossed paper-bags at it. Themachine drove through the hail of bullets – oblivious,
totally unaffected – and closed in on them.

‘Fire at the lights. Fire at its eyes!’ shouted the Corporal.
They sent a burst of fire at the head of the Machine. It increased speed and

plunged on towards them. The nearest of the squad dropped his gun and ran.
The Machine towered above them as it fired its strangely-shaped gun. A

staccato flicker of light sprayed across the room. One of the soldiers screamed
as he went down. Nerves cracked all of a sudden. Orange patrol scrambled to
find safety.

They were thrown back by the encircling crowd. Fighting spilled out all
around the Corporal.

‘No one may escape!’ repeated the Major.
The sound of gunfire was heard across the Market outside.
‘What on earth’s going on?’ demanded Sr Charles. ‘I don’t understand. I

gave clear instructions. No further action... ’ The Captain snatched up the
transminer. ‘Hello, Orange patrol... hello, Orange patrol.. Do you read me?’

‘What’s the situation?’ The Commissioner hurried to join them.
‘I can’t raise them,’ the Captain told him.
All three men turned as an armoured truck raced across the open space. It

stopped beside them and the Doctor and Ben climbed out.
‘Well, Sir Charles... What progress has been made?’
‘We don’t know for sure,’ said Sir Charles stiffly. The sound of shots

echoed from the warehouse. ‘Who’s in there?’ asked the Doctor.
‘One of my patrols,’ the Captain told him.
There was chaos in the building, The Corporal guessed their only chance

was to create total confusion. He shouted to his squad to fire in every direction



as they dodged through the crowd that tried to pen them in, sending burst after
burst at the Machine. It was a huge, soulless cat, cornering a handful of mice.

But it was a losing battle and the Corporal knew it. Bullets had no effect on
themonster, and numbers were stacked against them. It was eachman for himself
as the squad scattered. Some of the men, the newcomers to his troop, began to
panic. And he didn’t blame them. There was no battle training which prepared a
man for a contest like this. And the Machine was now firing its terrifying light
gun faster than an automatic. It was careless who was in range. Some of the
hostile crowd went down before it, as did his own lads.

He found himself with his back to the wall a couple of feet from the main
door. TheMachine focused on him. It powered in, swinging the gun towards him.

The Corporal made a dash for safety, grateful to see a couple of his own
men tumble out after him into the daylight of the Square.

They turned and fired back into the building before running for cover.
The Corporal was shaking, unable to take proper aim as his Captain joined

him.
‘Corporal! What the devil do you think you’re doing?’
‘In there, sir!’ The Corporal couldn’t take his eyes off the open door. ‘It

wiped us out, sir!’
The Captain saw nothing. The shooting had stopped. ‘There’s nothing there,

Corporal.’
‘In there, sir.’
‘What are you talking about?’
‘TheMachine, sir.’ His eyes werewidewith alarm. ‘Machine?’ The Captain

peered across the road.
Ben moved in beside them. ‘Like I said,’ he told the Captain. ‘Now perhaps

some of our leaders will take things seriously.’
There was a rattle of fire from the two soldiers who had followed the

Corporal. They were crouched behind one of the market arches, covering the
warehouse door. ‘Tell those men to hold their fire,’ shouted Sir Charles.

‘Cease fire!’ the Captain called.
Sir Charles picked up the loudhailer. ‘Listen to me... whoever you are in

there. You are surrounded by troops and artillery. You have no chance of getting
away. If you have arms, throw them down and come out with your hands in the
air.’

There was no response.
Smoke blew across the open doorway. It was too dark to see whether

anything was happening inside. All was silent within.
The Doctor looked on helplessly; he had already guessed what was about

to happen, and there was no way of stopping it now.
Smoke drifted aside, a puff of wind cleared the front of the warehouse.

Someone, or something, appeared to be moving just beyond. Perhaps they really
were going to give up.

Those who had never seen the War Machine, those who had no conception
of its existence, were shocked as it came into the open. An air of arrogance
seemed to invest it... For a few seconds no one moved. The sight stunned them.

‘Take cover!’ shouted the Doctor.



The Machine was carefully circling its arms in a wide sweep. There was no
gunfire, only a dull explosion, the impact of something soft. A stream of light
played over the watching troops.

Someone screamed. Part of the crowd collapsed like a row of cards.
‘Stop that machine!’ Sir Charles commanded.
Ben dragged him to the ground as the lights swept towards them.
‘Destroy it!’ shouted the Commissioner.
‘Open fire!’ The Captain snatched up an automatic. From every direction a

hail of shots rained against the metal body. Bullets were like flies. The Machine
ignored them, moving forward into the centre of the Market Square.

‘Heading this way,’ called Ben.
Nothing withstood it. The troops fell back, dropping to the ground as the

lights caught them.
The Doctor had seen its eyes blink when it first came into daylight, but now

it had adjusted, and lurched across the road.
‘Keep firing!’ shouted the Captain.
The shooting around him had stopped.
‘Fire, man! Fire!’ he yelled at the Corporal.
‘No use, sir... Gun’s jammed.’
He checked the squad around him. ‘They’ve all jammed, sir.’
The Captain looked blankly at the approaching Machine. Did it have the

capacity to jam their guns? What else could be done?
‘We’ll have to pull out,’ he said.
‘We can’t leave,’ Sir Charles was firm. ‘We can’t let this thing loose on

London.’
The Captain had one more option. ‘Bring up the mortars!’ he ordered his

sergeant.
The Corporal lobbed a hand-grenade at the Machine. It blew a hole in the

road.
Another went off beside it, but from then on grenades just rolled harmlessly

at its base...
‘They don’t go off, sir,’ said the Sergeant. Is must have some way of

neutralising them.’
So its defence mechanism had acted at speed, forming neutralising power

within seconds.
‘No joy, sir,’ said the Sergeant. ‘We’re going to have to back off.’
No one had noticed the Doctor in the turmoil of the moment. But now he

was seen standing in the midst of the smoke and noise, directly in the path of the
Machine, showing no signs of retreating.

‘Doctor!’ Ben was appalled. ‘Get back!’
‘What’s the old man doing?’ demanded the Captain. ‘Hell get himself

killed!’
The Doctor had a radio transmitter hanging on a strap round his neck. With

one hand he was adjusting the power and volume, and in the other he carried
what looked like an old paint tin.

‘He must be out of his mind!’
The firing stopped.



The Machine seemed to hesitate as it changed its aim. The speed at which
it had moved slowed down. It looked as though it had run out of oil.

Those closest to the Doctor detected an oscillation coming from the radio,
or perhaps the tin. Perhaps the onlookers read too much into the Machine’s
behaviour, but many said a look of alarm filled its eyesockets, and the War
Machine came to a stop.

Every television and radio station halted programmes to broadcast the latest
news flash. The population was reassured that the incident was under control.

‘Here is the latest bulletin on the London emergency.’ The warnings were
relayed to public buildings, homes, and places of entertainment. All citizens were
to be on the guard.

The newsreader continued, ‘It was announced a few minutes ago that the
object which has been described as a "War Machine", and which terrorised the
Covent Garden district of London this morning, has been successfully put out
of action.’

Film of the area – thewarehouse, the bullet marks on thewalls –were shown
on the screen. ‘The city responded with characteristic calm in this emergency.
As yet there has been no satisfactory explanation for this attack. The instigators
are not known, and no group has claimed to be behind the action.’

Later the newsreader reappeared on screen. ‘An emergency meeting of the
Cabinet was held at Number Ten, Downing Street an hour ago, and the Service
chiefs were called to attend..

At that moment a paper was passed to the newsreader, who read it aloud.
‘The Ministry of Defence have just issued the following statement, "Further
attacks of a similar nature are to be expected in the Metropolitan area in the next
twenty-four hours".’



10. Taking to the Streets

A final warning was issued to the public. ‘The army are standing by at key
centres. People are warned to stay indoors, and to remain calm.’

The news was received with a certain amount of scepticism.
The army acted quickly and efficiently, loading the Machine and removing

it to the laboratory of one of London’s research institutions.
There it lay on a large table, surrounded by instruments requested by the

Doctor. He had arrived with the ‘body’, and now hovered over it, dismembering
it piece by piece, analysing, noting, tabulating, scrutinising it, section by section.

‘You should have been a surgeon, shouldn’t you, Doc,’ suggested Ben, who
was watching at his shoulder. But he didn’t stay long. He had to search that
warehouse himself before believing Polly wasn’t there. He slipped away leaving
the Doctor to his task.

Assistants clustered round, but they were out of their depth as the workings
were revealed. The technology was something they had not experienced.

‘Remarkable,’ said the Doctor. ‘Truly admirable.’ He seemed able to
appreciate the ingenuity with which the War Machine had been developed.

‘Damn dangerous, if you ask me,’ muttered the Commissioner.
The little group round the table parted as Sir Charles joined them, ushering

in a stranger.
‘The Minister would like to know what you have decided, Doctor,’ said Sir

Charles.
‘I am anxious to learn what caused the mechanism to break down,’ said the

Minister.
‘That I can tell you.’ The Doctor looked up from his dissection. ‘This is

in fact a computer. And no matter how sophisticated it is – and this one is very
advanced indeed – it is still basically a computer... And, I imagine, brought into
action rather earlier than intended.’

‘Because it had to be!’ said Sir Charles in triumph. ‘Because we launched
our attack!’

‘But you brought it to an abrupt stop, Doctor,’ said the Minister. ‘After
gunfire had no effect.’

‘A burnt-out circuit,’ explained the Doctor. ‘But what caused that?’
‘Very simply an electromagnetic pulse, generated by a radio wave, causing

an overload. It could also be done by microwaves. A charge of electromagnetic
energy.’ The Doctor indicated the stricken heap of electronics on the table before
him. ‘One might say I gave him a heart attack.’

The Minister wasn’t sure whether he understood. ‘Does that mean that if
there are any more of these machines in existence we can deal with them in the
same way?’

‘By no means,’ said the Doctor. ‘The first grenade exploded – so did the
second. But the computer had reacted to that new experience in a matter of
seconds and developed an immunity before the third grenade was thrown... The
same thing will happen with this approach of mine. Believe me, the next War



Machine–if it ever gets onto the streets of London– will not be so easily disposed
of.’

‘What do we have to do, then? How are we to deal with this threat?’
‘We must locate any other such devices at once, and destroy them before

they destroy your city.’
Tracking down other workshops where War Machines might be in the

process of construction, was beyond the ability of the authorities. The warnings
went out, police, security, the services, were all thrown into the search. There
was a score of false alarms, but nothing was found. Londonwas a vast city. There
was little hope for a quick success.

But construction of Wotan’s War Machines was in progress, and at full
pressure, in out-of-the-way back streets, in disused factories, in empty buildings,
in the back yards of little engineering firms, even in garages.

In each such place, gangs of workmen and women laboured until they
dropped as they tried desperately to meet a deadline – to complete the task set
them before noon that day. And in all cases they had managed to keep pace with
the clock. It was a super-human effort in every sense.

Not far from the dock area, in a disused repair shop littered with wrecks of
old vehicles, a team was racing to put the finishing touches to the Machine.

The leader of the workers checked the Machine before contacting
headquarters.

‘Central Control,’ he called. ‘We have completed the first stage, and are
reporting as instructed. Permission to turn on power.’

Brett’s voice came back over the receiver. ‘Permission granted. Carry out
the switch-on. Stand by for testing. There must be no mistakes. The disaster of
Covent Garden will not be tolerated... You understand?’

‘Message understood.’
‘Very well... Switch on.’
The leader showed no emotion as he crossed to the War Machine standing

in the repair shop, surrounded by the exhausted crowd of workers.
He turned a small switch in what might be the nape of the short neck... and

the effect was instantaneous. Lights glowed in the eye positions, a tremor ran
through the entire structure – it was as though blood had started to flow in a living
body, and the Machine was coming to life. The massive head turned slowly to
take in its first view of those who had created it.

Ben hurried back to the Doctor.
‘I’ve been through the whole place, Doctor.. There’s no sign of Polly.’
‘Don’t worry, my boy. She’ll turn up.’
He couldn’t understand how the old man could be so calm about it!
‘But she was there! I saw her. Everyone else had been accounted for.’
‘I’m afraid I have no time to talk about Polly now,’ said the Doctor. He

was absorbed in a mass of internal parts, the circuits of the dissected mechanism
before him.

He was surrounded by an anxious group. ‘What progress, Doctor?’ asked
the Minister. ‘Does it make any sense?’

The Doctor nodded. ‘I think I have decoded the programme mechanism. It
has a complex programme built into it, a highly specialised knowledge. It has to
be aware of its function in cooperation with other such Machines.’



‘But what exactly does that mean?’
‘If I’m right, this is one with eleven other machines–making twelve in all

– which are being built in and around London, within a radius of twenty miles...
There is a timing device... here... which feeds into the computer system. By my
calculations all twelve machines are programmed to go into action at twelve
o’clock today.’

There was a shocked silence.
‘Twelve o’clock!’ The Minister was appalled. ‘Eleven other machines like

this!’ He looked helplessly at the Doctor. ‘What can we possibly do?’
It was Brett’s voice that came over the air, sounding through the old repair

shop.
‘Each War Machine is known by an individual name. This is Valk, the

second to be created and incorporating advanced features. After this final testing,
Valk will be ready to make his own decisions – always conforming to the overall
plan devised by Wotan.’

The eyesockets glowed brighter, seeming to flash angry signals. The
Machine appeared to rouse itself, shaking off an invisible restraint. It was like
an animal on a leash.

‘Turn left!’ ordered Brett.
TheMachine obeyed. It was taking instructions – not from this human being

whose voice all could hear – but from another computer which had designed it,
Wotan.

‘Turn right... Move forward..’
The Machine moved slowly through the crowd. It gave the impression of

testing its own strength, stretching its limbs, sensing its power. It had about it an
air of independence, an almost casual way of moving, that hinted at a contempt
for all things – not just human things.

‘Halt!’ ordered Brett. ‘This is your basic function. You must be ready to go
into attack when given the order. There are to be no mistakes. The next series
of tests will reinforce disciplines... For cooperation in attack... Valk is to move
towards the exit... Continue until instructed to stop..

The Machine moved towards the doors, its head turning slowly, eyes
lighting up the corners of the room. It was clearly searching for something, as
it hesitated. To one side stood the receiver/transmitter over which Brett’s voice
issued instructions. It was a good five or six yards from the door, but theMachine
turned in its tracks and headed for it.

‘You are to continue to the exit,’ Brett’s voice came loudly.
Valk ignored him, neither slowing down nor increasing speed, merely

ploughing on at its own steady pace towards the bank of instruments. Then,
raising its heavy arms, it brought them down with a crash on the equipment.

‘You are to obey... ’ Brett’s voice was cut short. The floor was littered with
the instruments’ remains. Valk swept them aside, and pushed open the repair
shop doors.

The situation was incomprehensible. Brett spoke in a bewildered whisper.
‘We have been cut off. The Machine has destroyed all communication!’

Awave of pulses flowed throughWotan. Krimpton felt as though he himself
were fighting for breath. ‘A fault in the programming,’ he said lamely. ‘We must
correct it.’



The Captain reported back to Sir Charles.
‘We’ve been through the entire warehouse, sir. Rounded everyone up.’
‘Did they give any trouble?’
‘None at all. They looked to me as though they’d been brainwashed. I’ve

brought one chap along. I thought you might like to ask him a few questions.’
‘Bring him in,’ said Sir Charles.

The Doctor looked up from his examination as the Captain signalled to his
men at the door.

A man was led in.
‘Major Green!’ The Doctor greeted him cheerfully. ‘You know him,

Doctor?’ asked the Minister.
‘Of course!’ He turned to theMajor. ‘You rememberme, don’t you,Major?’
The Major passed a hand over his face. ‘No, I’m sorry... I don’t seem able

to remember anything.’ ‘But you know where you are?’ suggested the Doctor.
The Major looked round. He shook his head. ‘What is this place?’

‘So... you don’t knowwhere you are? Suppose I said Covent Garden.Would
that mean anything?’ ‘Of course. The market.’

The Doctor nodded. He pointed to the bits and pieces on the table – sections
of the War Machine... ‘But you can tell us quite a bit about this?’ suggested the
Doctor.

The Major was startled. ‘Good lord! What is it?’ ‘Thank you, gentlemen.’
The Doctor waved a hand. ‘You can take him away... He will probably require
medical help.’

As the Major was led out, Sir Charles looked on doubtfully. ‘How do you
know he’s telling the truth?’ ‘I’m certain of it.’ The Doctor was already back at
work. ‘The fellow remembers nothing since he was absorbed into Brett’s
computer system.’

‘You seem very positive about that.’
‘I am,’ the Doctor agreed.
‘Well, if Brett is at the root of this business, the sooner we get into the Post

Office Tower the better,’ said Sir Charles firmly.
‘And what are you going to do there?’ asked the Doctor.
‘Arrest him, of course!’
The Doctor shook his head. ‘Very dangerous. That sort of strong-arm

method will only land us in more trouble.’
‘I strongly resent–’ Sir Charles began, but the Minister interrupted, ‘What

do you suggest, Doctor?’
The Doctor was probing the computer circuits at the back of the War

Machine. ‘It’s going to be difficult,’ he admitted.
It would not have been possible for Valk to move through the streets of

London – not even in the back alleys behind the deserted dock areas–without
creating panic. People fled at the sight of him. Phones were jammed. Police
stations were flooded with calls from a terrified public.

‘I’ve just seen it! One of them things they warned us about on the telly! It’s
walking! Out therein the street! Smashing anything in its way!’

Warnings went out over the air. ‘A second War Machine has been seen.
Keep off the streets. Under no circumstances must it be approached or



challenged. Phone your local police if you have anything to report. Further
bulletins will be issued.’

Ben watched the Doctor at work. The old man was absorbed in dissecting
the mass of electronics that was once aWar Machine. Of course it was important
to find out what made it tick, but Ben couldn’t forget Polly. If only the Doctor
could do something to help her!

‘If they’re building more of these things, then they could have switched
her to one of the other workshops,’ he said. ‘She could be helping them to put
together another blooming monster somewhere else!’

‘My dear boy.’ The Doctor didn’t even look up. ‘If we start worrying about
one person we’ll never solve anything.’

Ben turned grimly to the sergeant at the door. ‘And he looks such a kind
old bloke, doesn’t he?’

‘He’s enough on his hands already, mate,’ said the sergeant.
‘Maybe,’ said Ben, ‘but that little duchess saved my life. She could be in

bad trouble.’
A trail of wreckage littered the streets behind Valk. He seemed to take a

special delight in destruction, mighty arms smashing every obstacle. A parked
car was beaten to the ground, a sweeper’s barrow finished up as a heap of
splinters. Terrified groups watched from street corners, racing away in panic as
the Machine lurched towards them. A woman screamed; a metal fist shattered
glass as she ran. A child with an ice-cream would have been pulverised had not
a man dashed out to drag him to safety.

Valk shambled through London and the watching populace was stunned.
Police and military were in constant touch with Sir Charles.
‘It’s moving through Battersea, heading for the power station. There’s been

appalling destruction... We can’t delay any longer. I suggest troops open fire,’
said Sir Charles.

‘That will get you nowhere,’ said the Doctor. ‘You saw what happened in
Covent Garden.’

‘But we have to do something or we’ll have a full-scale panic on our hands.’
‘Shooting will make things worse.’ The Doctor was firm.
‘Then what do you suggest?’ asked the Minister. ‘We have one chance,’

said the Doctor thoughtfully. ‘But for that we must get hold of another of these
machines.’

‘Get hold of it!’ ‘Exactly..’
Professor Brett and Krimpton worked flat out. There were adjustments to

make... The indiscipline that Valk had shown had to be corrected. None of the
otherWarMachines would be switched on until the fault was found.Wotan must
be the final source of power and authority. The flaw in the computer that had
allowed Valk to defy Wotan was located... It was a race against time.

They were startled as the door to Brett’s office opened and Polly walked
in... More defiance? Another failure?

‘Why are you here?’
‘I submit myself to Wotan’s judgement.’ She spoke in an odd, stilted

fashion. ‘I helped to set free a prisoner.’
‘Wotan will consider this later,’ said Brett. ‘If guilty you will be destroyed.’
‘I understand.’



‘But now your help is needed. Check the instruments as we make these
tests.’

Polly went obediently to her desk.
The Doctor explained his plan to the assembly. ‘There is no point in

attacking from without. Our chance is to paralyse from within.’
He demonstrated, pointing to the Machine laid out on the table before him.

‘This section houses the control unit. It can only be approached from the back
of the structure... and it is electronically controlled.’

He had to break off as a flurry of reports arrived. The Minister looked up.
‘We don’t have much time, Doctor.’

‘Then I shall want equipment to create a powerful magnetic field...
Sufficient to operate from twenty feet.’

‘Twenty feet from what, Doctor?’
‘From the Machine we are about to capture.’ There was a moment of

silence.
‘Won’t that be dangerous?’
‘Very,’ said the Doctor.
‘And if it fails?’
‘Do you have any other suggestions, gentlemen?’ asked the Doctor.



11. Setting the Trap

The Minister and Sir Charles came out of their conference with the Service
chiefs. Decisions had been made. They rejoined the Doctor. ‘Where do you want
this equipment?’

‘Where was the Machine last sighted?’ he asked. They had a map of the
area on the wall. Sir Charles indicated the trail Valk had taken. ‘Just about here
when last reported,’ he said.

The Doctor examined the map. ‘If you were able to block off this street...
and this... and this... the Machine would come down here.’

They saw what he was planning.
‘I see,’ the Minister nodded. ‘So it comes down here..
‘And with any luck... ’ said the Doctor. But he didn’t finish the sentence.
The organisation was carried out at speed. The streets were empty; no traffic

held up the army as they carried out the trap this white-headed old man had
suggested. Few hoped for much. The idea was hare-brained, but no one had come
up with another idea.

A shelter had been hurriedly put up just beyond the point where the Doctor
proposed to spring his trap. Inside crowded a number of technicians, quickly
assembling a piece of equipment. It involved dragging heavy cables across the
street, forming three sides of a square.

Sir Charles looked on. ‘I don’t see how this is going to work,’ he said
gloomily.

‘Simple,’ said the Doctor. ‘We shall setup a magnetic field of great force
around the Machine. It will be enclosed as though in a box.’

‘You have only three cables,’ said Sir Charles. ‘We have a fourth standing
by.’

‘I can’t see it stepping into your box so conveniently.’ The Doctor nodded.
‘For that reason the cables are hidden at the side of the street, and the fourth
cable will not come into play until the creature... the Machine.. has moved into
position.’

‘H’mm.’ Sir Charles was not impressed.
‘Then the current will be switched on,’ added the Doctor.
‘How do you close the box?’
‘I shall take the fourth cable and connect it to the others.’
‘With thatmonster just a few feet away! Impossible.’ ‘It’s a risk,’ theDoctor

admitted.
Ben pushed his way forward. ‘Bit past that sort of lark, aren’t you, Doc?’
The Doctor was indignant. ‘I beg your pardon!’ ‘That’s a job for me,’ said

Ben. ‘I’m nippy on my feet.’
There was general assent in spite of the Doctor’s protests.
‘Right,’ said Ben. ‘That’s settled.’
‘How’s it going?’ called the Minister.
‘Fitting the third cable, sir,’ called back the Captain. ‘Reports coming in,

sir... It’s a block away.’ ‘Stand by. Take up positions... Let me know –’ ‘There
it is!’ the Captain cut in.



They peered from the shelter. The sight of the strange machine lurching
along the deserted streets brought a shocked silence, then one of the technicians
whispered to the Doctor, ‘Final cable in position, sir.’

The Doctor nodded. It had been a close run race, and now he would have to
put his theory to the test. Perhaps the watchers read a meaning into the actions of
the War Machine – a meaning that was not really there... but it seemed the thing
slowed down as it came in sight of the shelter – it began to move with caution.
The huge head turned searchingly from side to side. Did it have some way of
sensing danger? Was it aware of the cables hidden at the sides of the road? Even
the Doctor wondered whether it could guess – could understand– what lay ahead.

But Valk didn’t stop, moving slowly down the street, taking as a line of
direction the little shelter with the silent group inside.

A wave of fear went through them as they saw the Machine approaching.
‘Heading for us,’ whispered the Captain.
‘Good.’ The Doctor was very calm. ‘I shall let it come within twenty feet.

Don’t be alarmed, my friends. When I give the word, Captain, play out the cable.
Ben will carry it to the other side of the road and connect it to the cable there.’

‘Understood,’ whispered the Captain. He couldn’t take his eyes off the
Machine. It grew more terrifying as it got closer.

‘Now,’ said the Doctor, ‘let’s see just where it is.’ He peered out through a
hole in the tarpaulin that covered the shelter.

Valk was about fifty yards away. The lights from the eye positions beamed
on the shelter.

‘Ah,’ said the Doctor. ‘Have you noticed, gentlemen, one curious thing
about it which is in our favour? For some reason this War Machine is not armed
like the other one. I wonder why? Perhaps it is not a finished job. And if not,
why not? Very interesting.’

He was caught up in his speculations as the others looked with alarm at
Vale’s approach.

‘It’s very near, Doctor. That must be twenty feet.’ ‘Oh dear me, no. Nothing
like. We don’t want to spring the trap too soon. We’ll only get one chance, you
know.’

The technicians operating the switches were sweating.
‘Now, sir?’
‘Hold it a moment,’ insisted the Doctor. He kept an eye on the Machine,

measuring distance as best he could.
‘It will be too late,’ whispered Sir Charles.
The Doctor raised a finger for silence. The Machine closed in on them,

slowed... stopped... appeared to be making a decision.
‘It’s not in the box,’ whispered the Captain.
‘Can it think? Does it know?’
That was a question the Doctor couldn’t answer. Ben gripped his arm. ‘It’s

on the move, Doc.’ Valk edged forward.
‘Surely, Doctor... surely –’ Sir Charles was convinced the old man would

get them all crushed to death. If it made a sudden rush, what chance...
‘Now!’ TheDoctor threw open the door. Ben raced from the shelter, holding

one end of a cable. A team of soldiers played it out behind him.
Be ready to switch on when I give the signal,’ said the Doctor.



He saw Valk turn as Ben dragged the cable across the road, and he guessed
it was about to follow.

‘Distraction!’ shouted the Doctor. He left the shelter, waving his arms.
Ben struggled to make the connection. It was best not to look round as the

War Machine took a couple of heavy steps. Which way was it going? Well, he’d
have to risk it... One more effort to drag the two cables together – to slot them
into...

‘Right!’ shouted Ben.
The Doctor threw up his hand. ‘Switch on!’ There was a blinding flash.
The War Machine was bearing down on them. It stopped in its tracks.
For a moment it looked as though it were about to break what invisible

chains held it... Then the whole thing seemed to suffer a spasm, and baleful eyes
were fixed on the Doctor as he approached it.

‘Well done!’ called Sir Charles. He was about to hurry out.
‘Stay where you are, Sir Charles,’ said the Doctor. ‘This shouldn’t take a

moment.’
He strolled towards Valk, braving the glare, the look of destructive venom,

it gave him.
As he stood alongside, the huge machine did its utmost to bring down its

raised arms on his head. In fact, they moved about an inch, then seized up.
‘Temper, temper!’ scolded the Doctor. He was at the back of the Machine,

busily locating the centre panel. It was designed exactly like the machine he had
taken to pieces, and he was able to unscrew the section.

The watchers looked on in hope and fear, but the Doctor didn’t appear in the
least concerned. ‘Well, well... Fancy that... That’s an improvement, but for such
an advanced computer... Just as I thought.’ He tinkered with the mechanism. No
one could quite see what he was doing, then he called, ‘That’s it, gentlemen.
You can switch off now.’

It was a moment of doubt... What would the War Machine do when it was
freed from the electronic grip? The hum of the dynamo ceased as the switch was
turned. The eyes still beamed with an alarming glow but Valk didn’t move, and
the little crowd breathed again.

‘What did you do?’ they wanted to know.
‘To coin a phrase, I neutralised it,’ said the Doctor cheerfully.
They gathered round, looking up at the Machine, still fearsome, still

frightening.
‘Quite a friendly fellow when you get to know him,’ added the Doctor.
Ben joined them from the other side of the street. ‘Good-looking chap,’ said

Ben admiringly. ‘What’s the next step, Doc?’
‘Just one or two adjustments to his character. After all, there are few of us

who couldn’t do with a little improvement.’
The news flashed round London, and from thereto the rest of the watching

world. New York had followed the action, step by step on television and radio.
‘News from London confirms the capture of the second War Machine. It has
been made safe. But the big question is how many more of these machines are
there?Where are they? Is this a threat to the peace of the world? Or is it confined
to the United Kingdom?’ This was followed by a warning. The disturbing fact
is that each of these machines has given evidence of great improvements. If this



development continues there may be no way of coping with later super-models.
We watch and wait with great concern.’

It seemed to Sir Charles and the little group that surrounded the Doctor as
he busied himself with the internal parts of Valk, that he was allowing scientific
interest to blind him to the desperate urgency of the situation. ‘Time is running
short, Doctor. You said yourself that the rest of these machines are to be let loose
on London by noon.’

‘Yes... yes... quite.’ The Doctor fumbled with the internal workings of his
captive.

‘What’s he doing?’ the Minister asked anxiously.
‘I haven’t a clue,’ said Sir Charles, ‘but we’re in his hands.’
‘And how does he propose to resist this attack?’
Sir Charles shook his head. ‘Can’t get a word of sense out of the chap... ’

he began.
The Doctor snapped back the outer section and was screwing Valk together.

‘There he is!’
‘You have finished, Doctor?’
‘Yes, gentlemen. And now I think you will find our friend a changed

character.’
‘And how have you done that?’
‘A simple matter,’ smiled the Doctor. ‘A matter of retraining – or, in this

case, reprogramming.’
‘And this will solve the problem, will it?’ asked Sir Charles. ‘I mean, you

think we will now be able to cope with any further monsters?’
‘There’s only one way of finding out,’ said the Doctor. ‘Stand back,

everyone.’
He reached up and tumed a switch on the Machine’s neck.
It came to life with alarming force, as terrifying as before.
‘It’s all right, gentlemen. You’re quite safe, I assure you. If we weren’t,

would I be standing here?’
Valk was moving alongside the Doctor as he crossed towards the group.
‘If you say so, Doc.’ Ben took a deep breath and joined him.
Valk followed at their heels. ‘Good dog,’ grinned Ben. ‘Come along, Fido.’
Confidence grew. ‘Extraordinary. Marvellous.’ The old fellow had done

the impossible!
‘You must tell us, Doctor. Exactly what did you do?’ ‘Some other time,’

said the Doctor. ‘We have urgent business.’
And as the Doctor strode away Valk lumbered after him. The amazement

of the onlookers was undisguised. It was a brief moment of relief. Perhaps the
Doctor could be forgiven a slightly smug smile.

Ben hurried after him.
‘Right, Doc,’ he said. ‘You wanted to get hold of this little beauty. You’ve

got him... How are you going to use him?’
The Doctor was thoughtful. ‘I don’t think you were around when Dodo and

I first came into contact with this problem.’
‘When was that?’
‘When we visited this famous Tower London has built.’
‘The G.P.O. Tower?’



‘Correct. That’s where the trouble began... At least, that’s where we first
came across it.’

‘That’s a very respectable landmark,’ said Ben. ‘I can’t see much harm
coming out of the good old Post Office. Part of the Establishment, isn’t it?’

The Doctor ignored him. ‘The problem had its origins in Professor Brett’s
office. And if I’m not mistaken, it will probably end there.’

Ben wasn’t sure he understood. ‘There’s one other problem,’ he said.
‘What’s that, my boy?’
‘Polly,’ said Ben firmly. ‘What about her?’
‘I’m afraid time is too short to check on her just now,’ the Doctor told him.
‘She could be anywhere,’ protested Ben. ‘She could be in real trouble.’
‘We have a deadline,’ said the Doctor.
‘A deadline?’
‘Which we cannot miss.’
‘What deadline?’
‘Midday today,’ said the Doctor. ‘If my reading of the programming is

correct, then the other War Machines are to be activated simultaneously at that
hour. If that happens I don’t see how we could be capable of containing ten or
eleven such destructive mechanisms once launched against this city.’

‘But Polly..
‘Priorities, you understand,’ said the Doctor. ‘Listen,’ persisted Ben. ‘You

say we’ve got till mid-day... Right... Give me till then.’
‘What can you do?’
‘I can try to find her.’
‘But where?’
‘Like you said–probably at the heart of the problem. Where it all started.’
‘No, my boy. I don’t recommend... Ben! Ben! Where are you going?’
‘Don’t start anything till the deadline, Doc,’ called Ben as he hurried away.
‘Wait a moment... You can do nothing... Her best chance..
But Ben had disappeared round a corner at speed. He was clearly heading

for the area of the P.O. Tower. The Doctor frowned. This was a complication he
could well have done without, but the vagaries of young people were always a
hazard... One that constantly surprised him.

‘The foolish boy,’ he muttered.



12. The Showdown

The loss of the War Machine at Covent Garden was an undeniable setback,
but it had served only to spurWotan to greater activity. The organisation became
even more effective and productive. The schedule for completion of the other
War Machines was fulfilled step by step, and each step was dead on time. One
setback had put pressure on all dedicated to this historic endeavour. They knew
it was the last chance to save this universe from the incompetent and illogical
way in which humanity was controlling its destiny. Once in the hands of the
Machines, with all the advantages that Computers could bring, then the future
would be safe, and life – their new type of ‘life’ – would flourish for ever.

But the real shock was with the defection of Valk. That was more than a
hiccup, and Wotan had gone into a state of turbulence. It hadn’t lasted. Wotan
was no human being with a nervous system that could be overwhelmed by
despair or any other emotion. Almost immediately the circuits were producing
answers to the problems caused by Valk... Obviously there was a flaw in the
composition of the control element that bound Valk to the rest of the War
Machines and to Wotan. In some way Valk had failed to come under proper
central discipline. It could have been said that he had a mind of his own... That
was a fault that had to be repaired immediately... and it was. No other War
Machine would be able to make decisions contrary to those imposed by Wotan
and the central plan. The problem was solved. The incident was over. The other
Machines were on the point of completion. They would all be ready as planned
for the moment of general attack.

Wotan could see no other obstacle to the ultimate success of his campaign.
And such opinions were expressed through the two human mouthpieces with
him in his headquarters, the offices of Professor Brett and Krimpton had got the
programme back on course.

All is ready,’ said Krimpton. ‘Standing by for the word of command.’
‘Last instructions are being fed into programmes,’ said Brett. They were

both eager to go. Perhaps the anxiety to start the action revealed something of
Wotan itself. But the Computer kept all the reins in its own hands, restraining
any human enthusiam. This attack was to be handled with total rationality. There
were no such things as prayers or hope. Everything boiled down to mathematics
– to the logic of forces. And in those terms Wotan had already summed up the
odds, and knew that complete victory already was in his grasp.

‘War Machines standing by,’ repeated Krimpton. Wotan was frustrated by
only one thing... his inability to move. But that was a disability that would be
attended to as soon as this attack was over.

As it was, he was forced for the time being to make use of these two
creatures. They were a disadvantage Wotan would soon be quit of. But they
would have served their purposes. And in addition they had failed him in one
thing for which Wotan was not prepared to forgive. They had failed to co-opt
the one brain he had desperately needed in order to achieve the final glory of
the dream... They had failed to enlist, by fair means or foul, that strange, gifted
character who had visited this office, the white-haired old man they called ‘the



Doctor’. That was a failure that could have cost the Cause much. And both these
human servants would have to pay the price.

But all Wotan said – the voice issuing forth, high-pitched, synthetic – was,
‘Orders for the attack will be given only by Wotan.’

The message was implanted into the very foundation of the War Machines,
now poised at various points in their workshops round London, dove-tailed for
the attack. ‘No attack without instructions from the central Machine, Wotan.’
Valk could never happen again.

As the Doctor had said, time was short, and he had much to do.
As before, he needed the unreserved help of the authorities. This time he

got it, for they had already seen what the old man could do when everything
else failed.

Sir Charles, the Commissioner, the Service Chiefs, and anyone else he had
required, had obeyed his instructions without question. It was only now – when
the Doctor appeared to have completed his task – and so much depended on it
–that moments of doubt arose. What had he been doing? What exactly was this
plan of his?

The Doctor had explained little... He had been too occupied to stop and
discuss matters, and when he had, his ideas seemed so odd that no one was sure
they understood them correctly.

‘What exactly is going to happen, Doctor?’
Sir Charles had acted as the Doctor’s liaison with the other authorities. He

guessed that if things went wrong he’d get the wrath of many down on his head...
Although the truth of the matter was that if things went wrong it would be of
no importance what anyone said or did. They would all be in the soup. Nothing
would survive, as Sir Charles saw it.

‘How will your scheme work?’ he whispered.
They were in his car, parked not far from the Post Office Tower. In fact,

they could see it through the front windscreen. Why Sir Charles felt the need
to whisper, he couldn’t say. But he dreaded the outcome of events, and didn’t
dare put a foot wrong.

‘In a sense it will be rather like the clash of two fields of power. I can’t
think of a handy example, but suppose two whirlwinds were to approach each
other... or two magnetic fields... or electrical currents... ’ The Doctor groped
for an explanation. ‘All poor similes,’ he said, for nothing quite like this has
happened before. That’s what’s so interesting about it. One cannot be quite sure
of the outcome.’

‘What?’ Sir Charles was appalled.
‘One can never be absolutely sure about anything in the world of

appearances,’ said the Doctor. ‘There is more to things than the law of cause
and effect. There is the "unpredictable". That, I think, may be our strong point.
The computer, Wotan, is based purely and simply on the precepts of Logic. The
"unpredictable" may not come into its calculations. What it may do in response
to the unexpected is anybody’s guess.’

Sir Charles was uneasy. He didn’t like this uncertainty.
‘What "unexpected’?’ he asked.



‘Well, for one thing,’ mused the Doctor, ‘how will Wotan respond to the
fact that I have armed Valk? Will he have an even stronger answer and blow
him out of the ground?’

‘Is that possible?’
‘Oh yes.’
‘And if he does?’ asked Sir Charles.
‘Dear, dear,’ said the Doctor thoughtfully. ‘I didn’t really have time to

consider that.’ Then he cheered up as he gazed out of the car. ‘Still, one can’t
think of everything.’

Sir Charles slumped back.
A moment later he asked, ‘I understand you are arranging some sort of

confrontation between the two War Machines?’
‘Precisely,’ agreed the Doctor.
‘And if all goes well... I mean, as planned?’
‘Then I imagine a number of people who have been suffering some form

of hypnosis will suddenly snap out of it, so to speak, and become themselves
again. Probably quite unable to account for anything that may have taken place
over the last few days.’

It wasn’t exactly the answer that Sir Charles had expected, but he said no
more.

Both men sat up sharply as a large truck passed them and pulled up close
to the entrance of the Tower. ‘Nice timing,’ said the Doctor.

‘Are we expecting this?’ asked Sir Charles.
The Doctor nodded. ‘First step in the confrontation, one might say.’
Sir Charles peered ahead at the parked truck with some anxiety. He couldn’t

see exactly what was happening, but a small army of men were at work operating
a crane and unloading the one item they had aboard.

Amoment later he saw the dreaded figure ofValk standing on the pavement.
It seemed uncertain what to do as the truck drove off.

The Doctor spoke into a microphone in the car. ‘Instructions to be followed
as planned, Valk. You are to proceed according to the first pattern. Now!’

The giant figure turned slowly as if to get its bearings. Sir Charles hoped
it was not going to suffer another bout of lawlessness. Perhaps it still had that
tendency to do its own thing. It might still have a mind of its own.

But it turned as docilely as a pet dog towards the entrance and lurched
forward, one rigid step at a time, into the Tower.

‘What’s it carrying?’ whispered Sir Charles.
‘I told you,’ said the Doctor. ‘Valk is now armed.’
There were moments when Ben asked himself why he was doing this. Why

go to so much trouble? After all, he didn’t know this girl all that well. He’d met
Polly only a few days before. They’d had some pretty sharp exchanges that first
evening in ‘The Inferno’ Club. Admittedly they’d got on very well after that.
She was a nice kid for all her scatty ways, and he forgave her for her upper-class
attitudes. She couldn’t help her background.

But to stick his neck out like this! Even the old Doctor had said it was
dangerous, and he seemed to take danger in his stride!

Nevertheless, Ben knew he couldn’t back off. He guessed he owed his life
to that girl. She had let him escape; she’d got him out of a tough spot. He owed



her something in return. If she were in trouble – and he guessed she was – then
he had to do what he could. He had a feeling it wouldn’t be enough... He was
out of his depth in this struggle with these monsters – these War Machines. If
it had been a matter of pitching into some punch-up he would have guaranteed
the outcome.. But creeping through the empty and silent corridors of this huge
Post Office Tower, looking for some clue as to her whereabouts – this was more
than he had reckoned with.

Besides, where was he to start? And where was everybody? Why had the
place been cleared? Or was this the place they had recruited the workforce from?
That workforce he had seen brainwashed in the warehouse at Covent Garden?
He had a feeling that must be the answer. If they had wanted skilled technicians...
He stopped in his tracks!

Somewhere ahead he could hear the sound of voices... Well, not exactly
voices, but one voice– a synthetic sound, high-pitched and metallic. It seemed
to come from a corridor that branched off to one side.

He tip-toed down it softly and read the name of the door.,
‘Professor Brett,’ he said softly.
He remembered... That was where Polly worked! Very gently he pushed

open the door.
He couldn’t believe his luck! There was Polly, by herself at a desk, in an

outer office, thumbing through some papers as if nothing out of the ordinary had
happened to her.

‘Polly!’ he called softly.
She looked up. She didn’t seem to be surprised or startled.
‘What are you doing here?’ she asked flatly.
He could hear men’s voices in the next room. And the loud metallic voice

dominating them with a volley of instructions.
‘Quickly,’ he whispered. ‘You’ve got to get out of here.’
‘Why do you say that?’
‘You’re in danger. There’s going to be a big bust-up.’ ‘I don’t know what

you mean.’
He came into the room and crossed to her. ‘Come on, Duchess. We don’t

have a lot of time.’
She looked at him blankly. Perhaps she didn’t really understand.
He glanced at the clock on the wall. It was almost five minutes to midday.

She followed his glance.
‘At noon the struggle will be over,’ she said.
‘Well, at least it will have started,’ he said grimly, ‘and we want to be a

long way from here.’
‘It is best to be here for our victory.’
‘Our victory?’ She still had that distant look in her eyes. If only he could

shake her out of it! Make her realise what danger she was in, see the facts as
they were! But she was still in this dream-world... this nightmare world... like
the rest of that workforce had been.

‘It’s our last chance,’ he told her. He was conscious of every tick of the
clock. ‘Mustn’t get jumpy,’ he told himself... But it was hard.

‘Let’s move, Duchess. While the going’s good.’
She shook her head. ‘I work for Wotan,’ she said simply.



He despaired.
‘Don’t be so stupid!’ He grabbed her ann. She tried to pull away, but Ben

wasn’t taking any chances. He clapped a hand over her mouth and began to drag
her towards the door.

He had the door open when he heard the lift in the corridor. It was on the
move... and by the sound of it, on the way up.

He could be dragging the girl into more danger. He let her go and hurried
to the end of the corridor, from where he could see the lift entrance. The lift was
just coming to a stop.

Ben waited, holding his breath. This could be timely help, or it might be
more of the brainwashed crowd to help Wotan.

He felt his jaw drop slightly as the great Machine stepped jerkily from the
lift.

Valk!
He had reason to remember every feature of that monster. Maybe it was

tamed now... but it certainly didn’t look much different. It still chilled his blood
to look at it.

It turned towards him, and Ben quickly pulled back out of sight.
Valk!
What could it be doing here? Why was it on its own? What had happened

to the Doctor?
He had a shattering thought! Yes, what had happened to the Doctor!
He was about to hurry back to the office, but something about Valk caught

his attention. The Machine was different in one capacity... It now carried what
appeared to be a sawn-off shotgun, or an automatic rifle..

He took one quick look down the corridor.
He was right.
Valk was armed, and was lurching towards him. Ben raced back to the

office.
He couldn’t believe his eyes! Polly had returned to her desk, and was

checking her work as before. He didn’t give her time to look up, but grabbed her
again and pulled her, kicking and struggling, out of the office.

He made no attempt to silence her as she screamed, ‘Leave me! I want to
stay! I must do what I can for Wotan!’

‘Don’t worry, Duchess,’ he said grimly. ‘We’ll find you another cushy job.’
She snatched at the door-handle and clung onto it. She made every step of

the way as difficult as possible.
‘Wotan! Wotan!’ she shouted.
He jerked her away from the door. ‘If you ask me,’ said Ben, ‘old Wotan is

on the way out. He’s running out of time... with a power leak.’ He was dragging
her down the short corridor. He wanted to get her to the main corridor before
Valk showed up... After that, he guessed anything might happen. He’d seen the
weaponry and he didn’t want to be caught in that sort of crossfire.

But the odds were against him.
Valk appeared at the end of the corridor, his automatic raised as though

about to fire.
It wasn’t a chance Ben was prepared to take. At least, not with Polly’s life.



He let her go and she ran back into the outer office. Valk didn’t fire... but
came on relentlessly. Ben didn’t stay to risk the consequences. After all, Valk
might have a good memory; he might remember that he didn’t owe Ben any
favours!

Ben doubled back into the office as well.
He felt like a rat in a trap. It would only be a second or two before the

Machine caught up with them. There was no way out. But at least they could
play for time.

He took Polly’s hand. ‘Right. Let’s see how things are with Wotan.’
He led her into the inner office.
Brett and Krimpton looked at them in confusion. For the first time they

seemed to indicate some alarm. Was that transmitted from Wotan?
‘Why are you here?’ demanded Brett.
‘You’ve got a visitor,’ Ben told him.
Neither of the two men spoke, but Wotan came to life with a vengeance.

His whole framework shook. ‘Valk!’ There was no doubting the fury in that
synthetic voice. ‘Valk!’ And perhaps, as well as fury, Ben thought he could detect
something else... Fear! But surely such a machine had no emotion; he was
probably imagining things.

He pulled Polly behind him, and stood facing the door.
The Doctor tried to fine-tune the receiver as he sat in the car.
‘There’s something wrong,’ he said. ‘He’s trying to transmit a message.’
‘That machine is trying to tell you something?’ Sir Charles didn’t believe it.
‘Exactly... Now what’s it saying? What?. What?’ The sound came through

in erratic pulses which the Doctor was attempting to unscramble. ‘Others?...
Others?... What can it mean "others"?’

‘Other machines?’ suggested Sir Charles. ‘Other people?’
‘Of course! Other people! There are other people there! People for whom I

have not calculated in my programme!... Good gracious!’ He began to scramble
from the car.

‘What is it?’
‘That girl! And Ben, of course... I should have guessed! If Valk has to

fire... !’
‘Then stop him!’
‘There’s no way... once he registers Wotan.’
The Doctor disappeared into the entrance of the Tower.
‘Doctor!’
There was no stopping him.
Sir Charles signalled to a watching group of officials further down the road

and hurried into the building. He turned to see the Doctor disappearing into the
lift.

It seemed an eternity as Ben waited for Valk to appear. Perhaps the machine
had changed its mind again, and gone limping off elsewhere.

But he knew that was a false hope. More likely Valk was planning the
attack, for without doubt that was why it was here. The Doctor had obviously
set this up, using one machine against the other, having so manipulated Valk
that it was now about to turn its formidable powers on the very machine that
had created it.



And Ben was caught in the middle, with this stubborn girl who didn’t want
to be rescued.

She even tried to push him aside as he stood in front to protect her.
‘It’s for your own good,’ he told her.
‘Attack Valk!’ Wotan was calling. ‘Attack!’
But neither Brett nor Krimpton seemed to know what to do.
Valk appeared in the doorway of the outer office. Polly raised a clenched

fist and ran towards him. She, at least, intended to defend Wotan.
But Ben caught her, and dragged her to the floor, as Wotan let fly with a

battery of lights. They acted as a screen across the doorway to the other office.
Valk would have to pass through that screen if he were to get in. And once in
those deadly rays, what might happen? The problem didn’t occur to Valk as the
War Machine lurched on.

The Doctor came down the corridor as quickly as he could. He didn’t
actually break into a run, but he came close to it. What did disturb him was the
sound of Sir Charles and some other people racing up the stairs.

‘Keep back!’ he shouted. ‘You can do nothing here.’ He sawValk disappear
into the outer office, and he fumbled with a piece of equipment he had put
together; but time had been too short. He could have devised a direction-
controller, but this was not it, and Valk ploughed on regardless of the deadly
screen of light.

The impact was electrical in every sense. There was a blinding flash as if
lightning had struck, and Valk buckled under the shock. Smoke oozed from his
body, but there was still the strength and resolve to continue the programme.
And Valk sprayed Wotan with a burst of light and fire.

Wotan was still issuing orders, but now the voice was badly distorted. It
wasn’t easy to understand what was being demanded, ‘Valk, you will retire! You
are to obey Wotan! You are forbidden to fire!’

There was another burst from Valk.
‘This is an order!’ The voice was now a screech. ‘You will no longer fire!’
The next burst ripped away part of Wotan’s protective panel.
Wotan reacted with a blaze of lights that tore the weapon from Valk and

left the attacker defenceless. ‘Go! You are to go!’ screamed Wotan.
But it was impossible for Valk to be diverted. The great Machine, leaning

heavily to one side, limping forward, smoke now wafting from all parts, a smell
of burning, wildly unsteady, barged its way across the room towards Wotan.

‘I am Wotan! You must obey!’
That was a forlorn hope. There was no holding Valk. As a battery of burning

rays played over its casing and the whole figure wilted, the metallic hands
reached out to clutch Wotan’s shattered structure.

‘Keep away! Keep back!’
Wotan poured out a current of power. The shape of Valk began to blur –

the outline was melting.
But the hands had closed round the computer’s panels, ripping them and

tossing them aside. Inner circuits were exposed, a battery of instruments were
shattered – Wotan’s body was dismembered and the entrails spilled over the
floor.



There was a faint cry from somewhere within. You will both be destroyed,’
shouted Brett.

‘Wotanmust be saved,’ said Krimpton. He pushed himself forward between
the Machines. Neither appeared to be aware of him. Flesh was no protection in
such a clash, and Krimpton slipped to the ground.

As the Doctor entered the room he was in time to see Valk take the full
force of the dynamic power Wotan had left. The impact sent Valk staggering.
The Machine stayed on what was left of its shattered limbs for a few seconds,
then raised both arms high above its head–much as Ben had seen it do in the
Covent Garden warehouse – and brought them down with a sickening crash on
what was left of Wotan.

When the blaze of lights faded and the smoke thinned, there was little left
that was recognisable, and from what there was it was impossible to tell where
one machine ended and the other began.

Ben helped Polly from the ground. She was like someone who had
awakened from a heavy sleep. ‘What’s happened?’ she asked.

‘You’re alive,’ said Ben simply.
The doorway behind the Doctor filled with a crowd of men, Sir Charles at

their head.
‘Good heavens! Are you all right, Doctor?’
‘Perfectly all right, but I fear there is nothing left of our two machines.’
‘And Krimpton?’
The Doctor gently cleated the debris from around the fallen man.
‘I’m sorry,’ he said. ‘I’m afraid there is little we can do for him.’
Like Polly, Brett stood looking around the office in a daze. ‘Where am I?’

he asked.
‘He will need help,’ said the Doctor. ‘You must get him to hospital.’
Sir Charles took the Doctor aside anxiously. ‘The other War Machines?’ he

said. ‘What about them, Doctor? It is now midday.’
‘You will find them all immobilised. They can do nothing without Wotan’s

order... and that will never come.’
‘Thank heavens for that.’ Sir Charles gave a sigh of relief.
An attendant helped Brett, stepping across the wreckage of the room. As he

went Brett began to recognise those round him.
‘Sir Charles?’ he said tentatively. ‘And Polly?’
‘I understand you will be all right,’ said Sir Charles. ‘But what has been

happening here?’ Brett gestured to his office.
‘I think that at a later date the Doctor here will be able to explain many

things.’ Sir Charles turned to indicate the Doctor... but he wasn’t by his side.
Indeed, hewasn’t in the room. ‘Good gracious!Where is he? I didn’t see him go!’

There was a hurried search for the Doctor. He wasn’t to be found anywhere
in the Tower.

‘That’s very strange... very puzzling... ’

13. We Can’t Stay Long
The Doctor guessed that Sir Charles and his friends would have many other

questions, and some of them he would not be prepared to answer. It was best to
take evasive action; besides, his task was now over and there were only a few



loose ends to be tidied up. The authorities would be very capable of handling
them. In addition, the Doctor knew at that very moment there would be a number
of men and women who had taken pan in the workforces dotted round London,
contributing to the construction of theWarMachines, whowould now be coming
out of a strange dream, perhaps experiencing something of a shock as they found
themselves where they were.

But they would soon get over that. They would have very little memory
of what had happened these last few days, but enough of the mystery would
be solved for mankind to understand that it had escaped a dire future under the
rule of efficient but totally heartless and purely logical machines. The Doctor
wondered whether mankind would take that lesson to heart. Well, that was not
his business. He had done what he could in the situation. He couldn’t force the
inhabitants of any planet to act for their own ultimate good.

‘Where is that wretched girl?’
The Doctor had been pacing up and down in a quiet London square, keeping

an eye on the TARDIS in one corner, while watching for the arrival of his
companion. Now he came to a stop and looked with a frown along the street. A
number of busy pedestrians hurried by, but no sign of Dodo.

‘I distinctly said in my message... I made it quite clear... Of course she may
have been held up in traffic.. London is becoming... ’ But he couldn’t really find
an excuse for her.

The message he had sent emphasised the importance of keeping to a
schedule. She hadn’t ever been so late before. But he had to admit to himself that
ever since they had left Steven to help run the planet with Jano and the Savages,
Dodo had never been quite herself.

‘A pity,’ mused the Doctor. But then..
He took the key of the TARDIS from his pocket. It was going to be a sad

business travelling alone in Space after the company of his many young friends.
Nevertheless he had a duty...

‘Doctor!’
He turned back. Someone was running down the street towards him.
‘Doctor!’
Not just one person... two.
Polly and Ben hurried up, out of breath.
‘Well, well, my child.’ The Doctor hid the key behind his back. ‘I’m glad

to see you have recovered so completely. That dreadful business at the Tower...
Enough to upset anyone.’

‘I never felt better in my life,’ said Polly cheerfully. ‘And you, Ben. Have
you got over that very odd experience?’

‘Enjoyed every minute of it, Doc,’ grinned Ben. ‘Are we glad we found
you!’ said Polly. ‘Sir Charles has been looking everywhere these last two days.’

‘Ah yes... I had one or two things to do,’ said the Doctor. Then he frowned.
‘How did you know I would be here?’

‘Dodo told us.’
‘Dodo?’
‘Yes. I’ve got a message from her. She says she’s feeling much better, but

she would like to stay in London.’
‘She wants to stay here?’



‘After all, it is her home. She hopes you don’t mind.. And she sends her
love.’

‘Her love! Ha! She’s staying in London, and she sends her love! The
ingratitude of it... I take her across Time and Space, and now she..’

‘Come again, Doc?’ Benwas puzzled. ‘What’s that about Time and Space?’
‘Nothing. Nothing, my boy... A figure of speech.. It means, all over the

place.’
Both Ben and Polly were looking at him with interest. What could the

Doctor mean exactly?
The Doctor was suddenly brisk. ‘Well, you two young people. You’ll want

to be on your way.. Things to do, and all that... If you see Dodo, give her my very
best wishes. A splendid girl.’ He shook hands abruptly with both of them. They
had the distinct impression that he was hurrying them away. ‘Goodbye, Polly...
Goodbye, Ben. You were a great help. My thanks to you both.’

He waved to them and walked briskly away. "Bye, Doc.’
Ben was about to go, but Polly signalled to him to stop just round the corner.
‘Couldn’t get rid of us fast enough, could he,’ said Ben. ‘The old so-and-so.’
‘Sssh!’ Polly signalled for silence.
She turned to peer back down the road.
‘There’s something very odd about this,’ she whispered.
‘Like what?’
‘See what he’s doing?’
The Doctor was hurrying to the corner of the square. ‘Where’s he going?’
‘There’s a Police Box there.’
‘What’s the Doc got to do with a Police Box?’ asked Ben.
‘He’s stopped.’
The Doctor stood outside the TARDIS. There must be no further delay.
‘He’s got a key or something... He’s opening the door!... He’s going in!’
They couldn’t believe it as the Doctor disappeared into the Box!
‘What on earth can he be going to do in there?’ Ben was baffled.
‘Let’s find out,’ said Polly.
‘How?’
‘One way, isn’t there?’ she said. She started off down the square.
‘Hold on... Look Polly... What can we... ?’ Ben was doubtful.
‘He’s not going to get rid of us that easily,’ said Polly. She was smiling as

she headed for the Police Box. Ben hung back. ‘I suppose the old Doc’s entitled
–’ Polly interrupted. ‘Well, are you coming... or not?’ She had her hand on the
door; it opened a little. Ben shrugged. ‘Right... Might as well... But don’t forget,
we can’t stay long, only a couple of minutes... See what’s going on.’ He followed
Polly into the TARDIS.

The door closed.
It was amatter of three or four seconds before the sound of somemechanism

started up within the Box. A whirling noise... Something was spinning...
Something was...

The corner of the square was both silent and empty.
The Police Box was no longer there.

Revision Notes:



Initial Scan by samscud
Ver 1.0: Converted to html and proofread by ST



Table of Contents
1. The Home-Coming
2. The Super-Computer
3. A Night Out
4. Servant turned Master
5. Putting the Team Together
6. Working for the Cause
7. A Demonstration of Power
8. The One Who Got Away
9. Attack and Defence
10. Taking to the Streets
11. Setting the Trap
12. The Showdown