DOCTORWHO
THE SPACE MUSEUM

GLYN JONES

Based on the BBC television series by Glyn Jones by arrangement with
the British Broadcasting Corporation

Number 117 in the Doctor Who Library

A TARGET BOOK

published by

the Paperback Division of W. H. ALLEN & CO. PLC



1 AD 0000

Three pairs of eyes gazed at the scanner screen, eyes like those of a sad
and lonely person in a strange town desperately seeking the smile of a friendly
face. The fourth pair of eyes gave no hint of emotion. The Doctor was totally
absorbed, totally fascinated.

Vicki sighed, a sigh so audible that Ian could not resist a sidelong glance at
his young companion. He turned back to the screen and, knowing exactly how
she felt, almost mechanically placed a comforting arm across her shoulders. She
didn’t seem to notice. Barbara sighed, perhaps not quite so audibly but, with
gentlemanly impartiality, Ian’s other arm reached out to comfort her.

All he could see on the screen was sand, sand, sand, and more sand. Why
couldn’t the TARDIS, just once, materialise in a pleasant, leafy, tree-lined street
in Hampstead, or on Wimbledon Common? How about a pretty Yorkshire dale,
or a Welsh mountain top with nothing around more menacing than a flock of
silly sheep? Or, if it had to be sand, why not a sun-drenched Californian beach?
Or maybe even the South of France? Yes, there was a pleasant thought: cafes
and cordon bleu restaurants, palm-shaded promenades and contented humans
basking on that sand, soaking up the sun’s rays through their sunscreen,
swimming and playing in a beautiful blue and silver sea; smiling, laughing,
happy people, sipping cool drinks, tasting delicious ices. At that moment Ian
could almost taste tutti-frutti.

And why couldn’t the TARDIS materialise in the good old twentieth
century, in some peaceful corner of the world where they could just relax and
not be caught up in the stupidity of human wars or some other folly? Ian sighed
deeply and three pairs of eyes turned to look at him. He did not return their gaze
but he felt himself blush.

‘Where are we?’ he asked, as though they were travelling from London to
Manchester and he just happened to have dozed off for a few minutes. The eyes
turned back to the screen and now, for the first time, something other than sand
appeared as the scanner moved on.

‘A rocket!’ Ian squeaked. ‘In the middle of miles and miles of nothing but
sand?’

It was the Doctor’s turn to sigh but, before he could say anything, a second
rocket appeared, then another, and another; then a spaceship, and a second
spaceship, and more spaceships, so many ships of such diverse shapes, periods,
and design that now four pairs of eyes were rivetted to the screen.

There was no sign of life, only the ships, motionless in a sea of sand. And
then, beyond them, a building came into view. The scanner moved in for a closer
inspection. The building was large, very large, in shape something like a
ziggurat. The surface was made up of geometric panels, triangles forming
pyramids, and covered with what seemed to be a dullish metal which, although
the sky was bright, gave off no reflection.

‘It’s the casino,’ Ian thought, his mind still on sunlit beaches and gentle
pleasures, ‘like the casino at Monte Carlo, or Nice. We’ll find two-headed
monsters playing three-dimensional roulette.’ He chuckled to himself and then



stopped, in case someone decided to investigate his sense of humour. He needn’t
have worried. Everyone was too engrossed in studying the building in question.
He was intrigued though by the non-reflective panels. ‘Do you suppose this
planet has a sun?’ he queried.

The Doctor shrugged. ‘Presumably,’ he muttered,’otherwise where would
the light be coming from?’

‘I only asked.’ Ian was a trifle peeved at the Doctor’s brusque reply. He was
anxious now to be up and about doing something, and the Doctor, as far as he
was concerned, was being his usual cautious self. Ian sighed again.

‘What is the matter with you, my boy?’ the Doctor snapped. ‘If you carry
on like that you’ll sigh your life away.’

‘There doesn’t seem to be any sign of life,’ Ian answered, ‘Why don’t we
go and take a closer look? Hmm?’

‘Oh, so you want to go and take a closer look, do you? Well go ahead, no-
one’s stopping you.’

‘I’m not going on my own!’
‘Then you’ll just have to be patient and wait for us, won’t you?’ And the

Doctor turned his attention back to the screen. Ian glowered at the top of his
companion’s head. ‘And it’s no good looking like that,’ the Doctor added, ‘if the
wind changes direction you’ll stay that way.’ And he chuckled to himself.

Ian folded his arms, deciding not to say another word, and it was Vicki who
eventually broke the silence.

‘Have you noticed something?’ she asked no-one in particular and everyone
in general.

‘What is that, my child?’ The Doctor peered benignly at her, smiling
encouragement. Ian snorted, but not too loud, just enough to show he didn’t
approve of favouritism.

‘We’ve got our clothes on,’ Vicki said.
‘Well, I should hope so, I should hope so indeed!’ The Doctor sounded

quite shocked.
‘No,’ Vicki persisted, ‘I mean, our ordinary, everyday clothes.’ She looked

from one to the other. No-one seemed to understand what she was getting at.
‘Barbara, what was the last thing we were wearing?’ she asked.

‘We were at the Crusades,’ Ian said. ‘Are we never going to get away from
deserts?’

‘Exactly,’ Vicki replied. ‘So why aren’t we still in our crusading clothes?’
‘Because we’re not crusading anymore,’ Ian laughed.
‘I don’t think it’s funny,’ Vicki said, ‘I’m being perfectly serious. How did

we get from our crusading clothes into these, and where are those clothes now?’
‘Probably hanging up where they should be,’ the Doctor suggested, ‘And

if it concerns you that much, I suggest you go and take a look.’
‘Very well, I will,’ Vicki pouted and turned to go. ‘Oh, and on your way

back,’ the Doctor continued, ‘you might fetch me a glass of water. I’m quite
parched.’ ‘It’s all these deserts,’ Ian said.

‘I don’t know,’ the Doctor muttered, ‘all this fussing just because our
clothes change. It’s time and relativity, my boy, time and relativity, that’s all.
That’s where the answer lies.’

‘I dare say,’ Ian replied, ‘but we’d be much happier if you explained it.’



‘Yes, well... er... yes...’ The Doctor didn’t quite know how time and
relativity should affect their apparel or, to be more exact, their change of apparel,
but felt somehow he should. However, he wasn’t going to admit it so turned back
to the control panel and flicked a few switches at random, hoping something
interesting would come up on the screen to divert attention from his lack of
perception. But it was Vicki’s voice that created the diversion as she called from
the sleeping cabin. ‘Our crusading clothes are here, Doctor!’

‘Hmm? Oh, good, good.’ Feeling somehow vindicated he looked up at Ian
and Barbara and smiled. ‘You see?’ The two exchanged a wry look.

Feeling a little like Alice in Wonderland, Vicki stood staring at the neatly
hung clothes. It was all most peculiar. What was the last thing she remembered?
‘I blacked out,’ she murmured. ‘How could I change my clothes if I blacked
out? And the others didn’t seem to know anything so presumably they must have
blacked out too.’

Shaking her head, she moved away, though the puzzle stayed with her. She
filled a glass with water and turned to go. The hanging clothes caught her eye
and, still distracted, she let the glass slip from her fingers.

It seemed an eternity before it hit the floor and shattered. She watched it
happen almost as if it were in slow motion. Then, before she could do anything,
a reversal took place. The fragments of glass came together again and seemingly
leapt into her open hand, an intact and full glass of water. Vicki was too amazed
to do anything other than stand and gape.

And she was not the only one. In the console three pairs of eyes were staring
at the space-time clock. It was Barbara who had seen it first and her gasp of
astonishment had immediately caught the attention of the others.

The clock read ‘AD 0000.’
‘What on earth does it mean?’ Ian whispered when he had more or less

rediscovered his voice. ‘I mean, if we were on Earth, what on earth would it
mean?’

‘Perhaps it’s broken down,’ Barbara ventured hopefully.
‘I certainly hope so,’ was the rejoinder. ‘It’s like being suspended in time,

in limbo, and that doesn’t appeal to me one little bit.’
Vicki, carefully nursing her glass of water, entered the console room to be

brought up short by the expression of Ian’s sentiments and she too joined in the
contemplation of the clock.

‘Perhaps it has something to do with our blacking-out,’ she said finally.
Ian turned to the Doctor. ‘What do you make of it?’ he asked.
The Doctor shrugged, meaning he didn’t make much of it at all. ‘Well...’

He tapped the side of his nose and pursed his lips, then went on ‘... it could be
any one of a dozen things.’

Barbara and Ian exchanged glances.
‘There’s no such year of course,’ the Doctor went on. ‘You’ve probably

worked that out for yourselves already. I’ve only ever had trouble with that clock
once before.’ He wagged an admonishing finger at the offending instrument.
‘That was when Augustus Caesar created his own calendar and left a day out of
the one I’d been working on. Very inconsiderate. Amateurs should not tamper
with things they know nothing about.’



‘I wouldn’t have thought just one day wouldmake all that much difference,’
Barbara said.

‘One day per year over several million years is quite significant, Barbara.’
‘Yes, of course,’ Barbara agreed.
Ian resisted the temptation to say that several million years hadn’t passed

since the time of Augustus and instead, somewhat impatiently, he asked, ‘Yes,
but what has happened this time?’

But the Doctor had given himself time to think. He put out a hand in a most
delicate gesture and inclined his head slightly. It was something he had once seen
Lao-Tzu do and it had impressed him mightily. It certainly had had the desired
effect on the lapsed disciple at the time.

‘Patience,’ he gently chided, ‘I’m just coming to that. After that impertinent
piece of Roman interference I decided I couldn’t have the clock going wrong
again. It took far too long to repair. So I decided on an added refinement. If
something is about to go wrong the dials set themselves in the position you see
now and the clock isolates itself from the circuit. Saves a tremendous amount
of trouble.’ He was glad he had remembered this and smiled, well pleased with
himself.

‘Then something has gone wrong,’ Barbara said simply. ‘Yes, I suppose it
has,’ the Doctor replied, equally as simply and feeling somewhat deflated.

‘Well what can it he?’ she persisted.
‘I don’t know.’ For a moment his admission of fallibility deflated him even

further but the sudden look of panic on the faces of his companions quickly
brought him round. ‘Obviously,’ he said in his most authoritative manner, ‘the
trouble is a direct result of time friction..’

‘What is that?’ Ian asked, unable to hide the incredulity in his voice.
‘A sort of space static electricity, I suppose, would be the best description,’

was the answer.
‘I know!’ Vicki burst in. ‘Like people have when they can’t wear a watch.

You know, they put the watch on their arm and it stops but, when they take it
off, it starts again. And then when they...’

‘All right, Vicki,’ Ian cut in, ‘we’ve got the picture.’ He turned back to
the Doctor. ‘You mean it would set up some sort of interference with the clock
mechanism?’

‘Well, something has!’ the Doctor snapped.
Ian nodded his head slowly. ‘So the clock reverted to the safety device.’
‘Well done,’ the Doctor congratulated him, not without a hint of sarcasm.
‘You don’t seem at all worried,’ was the response. The Doctor’s eyes

narrowed. Was Ian on the attack or merely stating what he thought was obvious?
He decided to parry the question. ‘Why should I be?’ he shrugged.

‘All right...’
Wait for it, the Doctor thought, here comes the thrust... What year are we

in?’
The Doctor parried again. ‘A good question,’ he said.
‘Deserves a good answer. After all, we’ve got billions to choose from. Shall

we take a guess and see who is the closest?’
‘Ian!’ It was Barbara deciding to cut short the discussion. She wasn’t

prepared to referee a fight and was also aware that Vicki was getting frightened.



‘There is no need to guess,’ the Doctor said. ‘The clock has a built-in
memory. It will adjust itself as soon as we move off again. Time friction has a
convenient habit of being localised.’

‘Do you think it was this time friction that made us go to sleep?’ Vicki
asked.

‘Oh, no doubt about it.’ The Doctor felt he was on firmer ground again. ‘Just
as the clock protected itself by becoming neutralised, so we have been protected
by falling asleep. At least that is the best theory I can advance at the moment.’

‘All right,’ Ian said, ‘I accept the fact that we don’t know when we are, but
couldn’t we at least try to find out where we are?’

‘Certainly... Of course... Immediately.’ The Doctor returned to his seat and
his dials.

Vicki coughed. The Doctor turned back to peer at her. She held out the glass
of water. He reached out and took it.

‘Oh, my dear, pardon me. What terrible manners. While we were so busy
arguing...’ He cast a significant accusatory glance at Ian ‘... You’ve been
standing there so patiently with my water. Thank you.’ He took a sip.

‘Does it taste all right?’ she asked.
The Doctor seemed somewhat surprised at this. ‘Taste?’ he said. ‘All right?

Well, of course it tastes all right. Why shouldn’t it?’
‘Because it’s been all over the deck.’
‘What has?’
‘The water has. And the glass.’
‘What are you talking about, child?’
‘I dropped it.’
‘Dropped it?’
‘I dropped it.’ Vicki paused for dramatic effect. ‘And it smashed - into

smithereens.’ Another pause for added dramatic effect. ‘And, as I stood there, in
front of my eyes, it all came together again and leapt into my hand, water and all.’

‘Leapt into your hand!’
‘I could hardly believe it.’
‘And neither can I.’ The Doctor scratched the side of his neck. ‘Leapt?

Came together again?’ He transferred the glass from one hand to the other and
scratched the otherside of his neck. Then he sniffed and looked from the glass
to Vicki and back to the glass.

‘You think I imagined it, don’t you?’ the girl asked. The Doctor sniffed
again.

‘Well, drop it and see.’
‘No, no,’ he said, ‘I don’t think I’ll bother. I will assume it also has

something to do with the friction. And don’t ask me what!’ he added hastily to
Ian.

‘I wasn’t going to,’ Ian said.
The Doctor put down the glass and they all turned their attention to the

screen and the panel of instruments. After a moment the Doctor continued.
‘Yes... well... we seem to have arrived on a remarkable little planet and it appears
to be quite safe. So why don’t we venture outside, hmm? We’re not going to get
any answers staying here, are we?’



‘Safe?’ Vicki squeaked. ‘I think it might be a bit dangerous. I mean, there’s
the clock, and the glass, and all of us blacking out. I don’t think...’

‘She’s right,’ Ian said. ‘It’s all too quiet. No sign of life anywhere. I don’t
like it.’

‘But you were the one, a short while ago, who wanted to go out. Now what
is worrying you? I know exactly where we are.’

‘You do?’ It. was a choral response.
‘Of course I do! Look, what is that?’ The Doctor pointed to the scanner

screen. His three companions peered at the object in question.
‘I don’t know,’ Ian admitted. He turned to Barbara. ‘Do you?’ Barbara

shrugged. He turned to Vicki.
‘It’s a communications satellite,’ she said, ‘From Earth. Russian by the look

of it, about 1980.’
‘Oh, is it?’ said Ian sceptically.
‘Yes, it is,’ the Doctor concurred. Vicki smiled at Ian. If she hadn’t been a

well-mannered young lady she might have been tempted to put out her tongue
but, from the look on Ian’s face, it would seem the smile sufficed.

‘Now, what do we have here, hmm?’ the Doctor went on.
‘Obviously it got lost in space, went out of orbit and landed here, or crashed

rather,’ said Ian.
‘Nonsense, my boy. It may be a bit tarnishedwith a dent here or there but it’s

all in one piece. No, my opinion is, it was brought here, together with everything
else.’ There was a hint of excitement in the Doctor’s voice and the tempo of
his speech increased. ‘If you look at each of those objects beyond the satellite -
each ship, each rocket - you will notice that each one is advanced in design. It’s
a natural progression. And that is precisely why I know where we are. There’s
nothing random about the positioning of any of these objects. They’ve been
placed like that.’

‘You mean it’s like a... a museum?’ Barbara asked. ‘Precisely!’ The Doctor
was at his most triumphant, ‘A space museum.’

‘Then there must be somebody to look after it,’ Ian said.
‘A distinct possibility.’ The Doctor rose to his feet. ‘Shall we go and find

out?’ He nonchalantly flicked a switch on the control panel and the doors of the
TARDIS slid open. No-one moved.

‘Well?’ the Doctor queried, ‘Have you no sense of scientific curiosity? No
sense of adventure? Vicki, what about you? What about the glass? Aren’t you
just a tiny hit curious?’

‘A little,’ Vicki said.
‘A little is enough. Come.’ And, without bothering to see who followed,

the Doctor turned and led the way.



2 Exploration

Unexpectedly, the air was quite mild. They stood outside the TARDIS and
looked around. Ian squinted up at the sky. There were two suns, quite small and
very far away, but two nevertheless. This would explain both the light and the
coolness of the atmosphere. The silence was broken by the Doctor.

‘Close the door, Chesterton,’ he commanded. ‘You weren’t born in a barn.
I believe that is the quaint colloquial expression.’ Ian bit his tongue and obliged
and, with the TARDIS safely locked, they moved away, their feet making no
sound and sinking quite deeply in the white dust that covered the surface. The
Doctor rubbed his hand on a rock and looked at his palm.

‘Steatite,’ he muttered.
‘Dust, I’d call it,’ Ian replied, forgetting for a moment that he had

determined to keep his opinions to himself for a while. Everything today -
whatever day it was; probably some Friday the 13th - seemed to be conspiring
against him. Maybe his bio-rhythms were at rock bottom. Certainly the Doctor
seemed to have it in for him. But then, maybe he wasn’t feeling all that secure
himself, and that would explain his testiness. But, for once, they seemed to be
in accord.

‘Yes, that’s exactly what it is,’ the Doctor agreed. ‘I’ve never seen erosion
in such an advanced stage. The whole planet would seem to be completely dead.’

Once again Ian forgot his resolution. ‘How can you make such a sweeping
statement?’ he challenged, ‘We’ve only seen a few square yards of it. I’ve always
associated planetary extinction with extreme cold. You know, like the dark side
of the moon. Our moon.’

‘Oh!’ the Doctor blasted back, ‘You’ve been there, have you?’ And then,
on a quieter note but still with an edge, ‘No, no, of course not. I beg your pardon.’

Barbara decided to intervene. She had no idea how long they had all slept
but the rest obviously hadn’t done these two much good, hissing at each other
like a couple of alley cats.

‘The climate seems quite pleasant..’
Ian turned on her.
‘Maybe it gets colder when it’s dark,’ she added hurriedly.
‘And there’s another thing,’ Ian persisted, turning back to the Doctor, ‘if

the entire planet...’ He stressed the word with such vehemence it sounded like
the release of a slingshot... ‘is dead, then where is the oxygen coming from? The
atmosphere is not only pleasant, we happen to be breathing it.’ Game, set and
match, Ian thought.

‘It could be artificially manufactured,’ the Doctor replied and, before Ian
could argue further, went on: ‘But it’s no good standing here speculating. Let’s
go and search for some answers, hmm?’ He smiled placatingly. ‘But keep
together, is that clear?’ They all nodded and, led by the Doctor, started to move
in the direction of the building they had seen on the scanner. They had gone only
a few steps when Ian stopped and called: ‘Doctor!’

‘Oh, what is it now, Chesterton?’ The Doctor was growingmore than a little
impatient. He stopped, turned, and glared at Ian. But Ian was not going to be put



off. He glanced around to make sure they were all looking at him and, having
their attention, he said, ‘You’d agree that we’re walking on some sort of dust,
I’d say at least an inch deep, wouldn’t you?’

‘Yes, yes, of course.What of it?’ TheDoctor’s manner was evenmore testy.
If someone had something to say why not.. just say it instead of beating about
the bush?

Ian dropped his bombshell: ‘Then why aren’t we leaving footprints?’ His
voice was very quiet and it was seconds before the others could take their eyes
off his face and look down at their feet.

There were no footprints.
They stood for a moment, not knowing what to do or what to say. Then Ian

took a few steps. His feet made prints in the dust which they all saw but then, as
they watched, the prints disappeared and it was as if no-one had walked there.
They all turned to look at the Doctor who merely shook his head, as bewildered
as they were. ‘Strange,’ he said, ‘Most strange.’

‘Any theories?’ Ian asked blithely.
The Doctor shook his head again. ‘No, my boy, none whatsoever. But I’m

sure an explanation will present itself sooner or later. Let’s continue our journey
shall we?’

They set off once more, none of them being able to resist looking around
every now and again to watch their footsteps disappear behind them. But, after
a while, the game lost its novelty and they turned their attention to the exhibits
lining either side of their route. For, by now, they had come to accept that this
was what they were.

‘I’m tired,’ Vicki complained after a while. ‘It isn’t easy walking in this
stuff.’ She stamped her foot a couple of times, sending up little showers of white
dust, and puffed out her cheeks to emphasise her point.

‘Actually.’ the Doctor said, ‘the air is a bit rarified. It’s that, rather than the
sand, that makes walking such an exertion. I wonder how far it is now.’

Ian looked up at the colossal hull of the spaceship by which they had
stopped. ‘We must be nearly there,’ he said. ‘I remember seeing this on the
scanner, with the buildings...’ He looked around and then pointed: ‘That way.’

‘I wonder where this came from,’ Vicki whispered, gazing at the awesome
giant that towered above them.

‘Who knows, Vicki?’ Ian said. ‘But I doubt it would ever get back there.
Look at that rust. It must have been standing there for years.’

‘Rust means moisture,’ the Doctor chipped in. ‘You were right, my boy,
the planet may not be as dead as I thought. Unless, of course, the ship rusted on
its journey here.’

Vicki gazed up at the gigantic wreck. It seemed too bulky to have been
a fighting ship. A freighter maybe. She wondered what vast distances it had
travelled and what its cargo could have been. Onwhat far away planet had it been
constructed? And what kind of creatures constituted its crew? What adventures
did they have, and where were they now? She shuddered. ‘It’s so dead,’ she said,
‘Let’s get away from here.’

‘Yes, yes,’ theDoctor agreed, ‘Come on, you two.’ And he andVickimoved
away.



Barbara turned to Ian. ‘I think we should go back,’ she said. Ian shook his
head. ‘We can’t now.’ He looked around, at the motley collection of obsolete
and decaying high-tech that surrounded them, from satellites that would fit
comfortably in the back of a shooting brake to the huge ships from which, he
imagined, a thousand ormore ghosts were silentlymocking him. ‘I have a terrible
feeling that to go back would be more dangerous than to go on,’ he said. The
Doctor andVicki were now some distance away and he remembered theDoctor’s
admonition to stay together. ‘Come on, Barbara,’ he urged, and they set off after
the others.

The building was further from their landing point than had appeared on the
scanner and it took the little group some time to reach it. It was also much larger
than they had expected. There appeared to be no fenestration and they found
themselves standing before what appeared to be the only entrance: sliding doors,
now closed, and with no indication of how they could be opened.

‘I wonder how we get in,’ the Doctor mused. ‘There seems to be absolutely
no way of opening these doors.’

‘No bell marked Caretaker?’ Ian chuckled. But, like Queen Victoria, the
Doctor was not amused.

‘Don’t make jokes, Chesterton,’ he snapped. ‘Make yourself useful instead.
Look around for something.’

‘Like what? Like what?’ Ian gasped. He was finding it more and more
difficult to breathe and was beginning to feel distinctly light-headed. ‘Maybe
you’d like me to call the AA: "Excuse me, we’re stranded on this planet. There
isn’t a living creature in sight. Would you come and pick us up please? How long
will it take for you to get here? Oh, I see, about a hundred light years. Well, that’s
fine, we’ll wait. We’re not going anywhere."’ Suddenly he wished he’d taken
the Doctor’s advice and kept his mouth shut. He gasped for breath and the light-
headedness turned into dizziness. There was a ringing in his ears and a myriad
tiny lights flashed and danced before his eyes. His knees suddenly buckled and
Barbara and the Doctor reached out just in time to stop him from falling.

‘Easy, my boy, easy,’ the Doctor said.
‘Sorry,’ Ian mumbled, ‘sorry.’
They supported him for a few moments until the dizzy spell passed.
‘I’m all right now,’ he said, ‘Thank you.’ His breathing was still laboured

and shallow, through the open mouth, but he moved away from their supporting
hands to show that all was well.

‘Perhaps Ian is right,’ Vicki said, looking uneasily about her, ‘perhaps there
isn’t anything alive here.’ She was beginning to feel a slight tingling sensation
in her nostrils and the back of her throat and, almost unconsciously, caressed her
neck with thumb and forefinger.

‘And there’s something else,’ Barbara added, ‘Something very peculiar.
Have you noticed?’

‘Everything is peculiar,’ Ian said, but Vicki and the Doctor were both
intrigued by Barbara’s question and wanted to know more.

‘It’s the silence,’ she said. ‘When we stop talking there isn’t a sound.
Listen.’

Ian closed his mouth to stop the sound of his own breathing and they
listened.



‘It’s the kind of silence you can almost hear,’ Barbara concluded.
‘More and more like a graveyard,’ Ian said.
‘Now, stop it! Stop it, the both of you,’ the Doctor ordered sternly. ‘You’ll

all start imagining things. There’s always an expla -’ He stopped short as he
noticed the sudden reaction on the faces of his companions and, looking around,
saw the doors behind him slowly and silently sliding open.

‘Quick!’ he hissed, and the four darted to one side and flattened themselves
against the building.

‘Did you see anything?’ Barbara whispered to Ian.
He nodded. ‘A very large room, and two men coming out.’
‘Men?’
‘Well, they look like men, in uniforms, white, with sort of red flashes across

the chest. And they’re armed... I think.’ He nodded again. ‘They must have seen
us.’

‘Well, we’ll soon find out, won’t we?’
‘Shhh!’ The Doctor put his finger to his lips to indicate silence and they

waited. The doors were now wide open and, any moment, somebody - or
something - would emerge. It was then that Vicki felt the tickle in her nostril that
presaged a violent sneeze. A moment later Barbara, forewarned by the sound of
sudden short sharp intakes of breath beside her, hastily reached out and pressed
her forefinger under Vicki’s nose. The sneeze subsided and Vicki nodded to
show the danger was passed. Barbara pursed her lips and would have whistled
her relief but, at that moment the two men, as Ian had called them, appeared.

But the pair were human only to the casual observer. Facially they
resembled men, except for their hair which grew down to a point between their
eyebrows, but their movement was strange. Their walk was a stiff, almost
mechanical action that belied any flexibility at the knee or ankle, and their arms
hung stiffly down. They stared straight ahead as they moved, and not even an
explosive sneeze from Vicki, that caught her completely unawares, brought any
reaction, much to the astonishment of all four travellers who waited breathlessly
for the worst. They continued their slow steady march.

‘They didn’t hear it!’ Barbara exclaimed, her eyes fixed on the backs of the
departing creatures, still half expecting them to turn and challenge them. ‘They
didn’t hear it!’

‘Another mystery,’ Ian said. ‘They must he stone deaf.’
‘Never mind the mystery.’ The Doctor tugged at Ian’s sleeve. ‘Just thank

our lucky stars we weren’t caught. Now, let’s get away from here quickly.’
‘Maybe they’re friendly,’ Ian said.
‘They don’ look very friendly to me,’ Vicki stated with absolute conviction.

‘And I’m going to sneeze again.’
‘In here, quick! While we’ve got the chance.’ The Doctor let go of Ian’s

sleeve and darted through the open doors followed quickly by the others.
They were only just in time. Behind them the doors started to close.
They found themselves in a large room in which were transparent display

cabinets containing unfamiliar artifacts, and objects too large for cover were free
standing or mounted on plinths. From the room several arched openings led into
other rooms.



‘You see?’ The Doctor said, ‘I was right. A museum. I recognise various
things here. They come from different civilisations and different times. This
room is, at a guess, a sort of lobby with just enough in it to whet a visitor’s
appetite. No doubt we will find everything carefully catalogued and labelled.
Fascinating, fascinating.’

He peered at the contents of one of the cabinets. ‘Space Tracers,’ he said.
‘Space Tracers. Come and look, come and look.’ Ian and Vicki studied the
contents of the cabinet. All they could see were half a dozen miniscule slivers of
metal. Ian looked up enquiringly at the Doctor.

‘You don’t know what they are, do you?’ he said, raising both eyebrows.
‘Well, maybe you’d understand what I meant if I said, automatic pilot, hmm?
Oh, not across five hundred miles, or even a thousand miles, but across millions.
Oh, yes, micro-technology when your ancestors were still living in caves.’

‘There are no windows,’ Barbara said. The Doctor turned to her in some
surprise to find she was surveying the room itself rather than its contents. He
looked up at the ceiling.

‘No. There is something in the atmosphere probably with very slow
destructive properties, the rust on the ships out there for example, that might
explain the lack of windows. Everything in here is much better preserved.’

‘Then where is the light coming from?’ Barbara persisted. ‘I can’t see any
light source.’

The Doctor shrugged. ‘Perhaps some fluorescent substance built into the
fabric of the building,’ he said with some impatience. Scientific curiosity was
one thing but why worry over such trivialities? He did wish people would get
their priorities right.

‘It’s just crossed my mind,’ Ian butted in. ‘Supposing the "TARDIS is little
more than a pile of dust when we get back to it.’

‘If we get back to it,’ Barbara added.
‘Don’t be silly!’ The Doctor snapped. ‘It takes ages for that sort of corrosion

to take place.’
‘In which case,’ Ian smiled, ‘let’s enjoy the museum. I used to go to the

ScienceMuseum in South Kensington quite a lot. It’s almost like being at home.’
‘Except there are no men in blue uniforms to tell you not to touch anything,’

Vicki laughed.
‘Well, you just pretend there are, young lady, and keep your hands to

yourself,’ the Doctor ordered. ‘We know nothing about the inhabitants of this
place and I don’t want to hear any alarm bells going off.’

‘They’re going off right now,’ Ian said.
‘What!’ The Doctor almost screamed.
‘In my head.’
‘Making jokes again, Chesterton? Not in very good taste. Not at all witty

either.’
It wasn’t a joke,’ Ian protested. ‘I meant it. I don’t like all this one little bit.’
But the Doctor had now lost all patience. ‘Let’s go through here,’ he

suggested and, suiting the action to the word, he marched through one of the
openings, gave a little shriek and leapt with fright.

He had come face to face with a Dalek.



‘Oh, my goodness gracious!’ he gasped, holding his hand over his thumping
heart. ‘Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear, what a start that gave me.’

His reaction had brought the other three running and now they stood around
staring at the menacing object that brought back memories of terror to all but
Vicki. She was merely curious. ‘What is it?’ she asked.

‘A Dalek,’ the Doctor replied. ‘Or, at least, the casing for one.’
‘Oh!’ Vicki was intrigued. Is that what they look like? Doesn’t look very

dangerous to me, rather like a giant pepperpot.’
‘Well, the pepper that came from that pot sneezed a lot of people into

another world, I can tell you,’ Ian said with feeling. ‘All I hope is we don’t come
across any live ones.’ Then, seeing the Doctor’s look, he hastily added, ‘Which,
to say the least, is extremely unlikely... I hope.’

Vicki reached out to give the Dalek a pat.
‘Don’t touch!’ the Doctor barked.
‘Oops! Sorry,’ Vicki said. ‘Forgot.’
The Doctor sighed, shook his head, and they moved further into the room.
‘Well,’ Barbara said after a fewmoments, ‘apart from the Dalek it all seems

quite ordinary to me.’
‘No, it isn’t,’ Ian contradicted her. ‘There’s something peculiar you haven’t

thought of.’
‘Oh?’ Barbara looked at him quizzically.
‘Yes, there is,’ Ian said. ‘Those two men we saw must have been guards,

or curators, or custodians, or whatever, but we seem to be the only visitors. I
wonder why.’

‘Maybe it’s not open to the public at the moment,’ Vicki suggested. ‘That’s
why the doors were closed. We shouldn’t really be here.’

‘You can say that again,’ Ian said with even more feeling.
They had now almost traversed the length of the room and another arched

opening lay ahead of them. The Doctor, anxious to move on and find the answers
to all the questions that nagged him, went on ahead while the others straggled
a little, distracted by the exhibits.

‘Have you noticed?’ Vicki said, ‘None of the exhibits are labelled.’
‘Hmm,’ Ian pondered this for a while. ‘Maybe, being a spacemuseum, there

is some other method of finding out what they are.’
‘Why should that be?’ Vicki asked.
‘Well,’ he answered, ‘howmany languages dowe have on Earth?Hundreds.

So how many do you suppose there must be...’ He couldn’t think of the right
word: universal? intergalactic? interstellar? So he waved his arms in a circular
motion meant to embrace all communicating life forms.

Vicki nodded. ‘Yes,’ she said simply, ‘I suppose so.’
‘Well, well,’ Ian teased, ‘I’m glad I might have the right idea about

something at last.’ And he was about to make a closer examination of one of the
cabinets to see if there was anything to prove his theory when the Doctor bustled
back into the room making urgent gestures with both hands: ‘Quick! Hide, hide!
There’s somebody coming!’

With some alacrity, he disappeared behind a large plinth where he was
immediately joined by the others just as two youngmen appeared in the doorway.
These two were definitely more human-looking than the ones they had seen



earlier. Each was dressed in a shabby, black, overall uniform, and unarmed. They
were about the same age as Vicki, perhaps a little older, and there was something
pathetic, even vulnerable about them. They stopped at the opening and looked
around as if to make sure they were not being observed, then they stepped into
the room and started to talk quite animatedly in full view of the four figures
crouching behind the socle. But not a word of what they said could be heard and,
after a few moments, they turned their backs on the room and disappeared the
way they had come. The four rose slowly to their feet and looked at each other
in utter bewilderment.

‘They were talking,’ Barbara whispered, asking for confirmation.
‘Undoubtedly,’ the Doctor agreed.
‘But we couldn’t hear a word!’
‘Perhaps,’ Ian suggested, ‘they have a different mode of communication.

Or perhaps their hearing is pitched to a different frequency, so that they could
hear each other, but we couldn’t hear them. Maybe, if we talked, they wouldn’t
hear us.’

Barbara turned to the Doctor. ‘Is that possible?’ she asked.
‘I suppose it’s possible,’ the Doctor replied. ‘Chesterton could very well

be right there.’
‘Two up to Chesterton,’ Ian murmured.
‘On the other hand, there could be some other explanation, and I’ve a feeling

that there is. I’m also beginning to feel like my young friend here,’ - he laid
a hand on Ian’s shoulder - ‘I don’t like it one little bit. In fact, I have a nasty
suspicion we are in for a big surprise.’

‘Why?’ Barbara demanded to know.
‘Too many things unexplained. Too many things!’ The Doctor almost

exploded, waving an arm around the room, and he suddenly noticed that Vicki
was behaving somewhat suspiciously a few yards away. His waving arm leading
the way, he marched up to her.

‘I thought I told you not to touch anything!’ It was only a whisper but there
was no mistaking the Doctor’s anger. Tirne Lords tend to bristle and behave like
mere mortals when their orders are disobeyed, especially when they’re already
on tenterhooks, and Vicki’s action was tantamount to mutiny in the ranks. She
tried to control her smile before turning to meet the Doctor’s accusing glare with
an expression of bland innocence. It wasn’t too often, rarely in fact, that someone
had an opportunity to practise one-upmanship on the master.

‘I’m not touching anything,’ she said sweetly, and lost control of her face.
The Doctor seemed to grow three inches taller before her eyes: not only
disobedience, but contradiction! And how dare she find it amusing?

‘Come, come, child,’ he hissed, trying to maintain some composure. He
hated it when his fingers trembled. ‘I saw you. You had your hand on that
cabinet.’ He would have pointed to the object in question but was too aware of
his agitation so inclined his head instead.

Vicki folded her arms. ‘No,’ she said.
The Doctor frowned, a frown meant to accentuate the glare and strike terror

in the hearts of errant youngsters. Not only disobedience and contradiction -
his lips almost disappeared and a tiny vein in his temple began to bulge - and
silliness, but prevarication as well. ‘Humph!’ He snorted loudly.



Ian cast an anxious glance towards Barbara but she merely raised her
shoulders and an accompanying eyebrow.

‘Then why did you pull your hand away when you saw I had noticed you?
You mustn’t tell falsehoods.’ Having gained control of his trembling, the Doctor
now felt free to waggle an admonishing finger.

‘I’m not, honestly!’ Vicki protested, ‘I haven’t really touched anything.
Look!’ She turned back to the cabinet and placed her hand on its transparent
top. At least, for one moment, that was what she appeared to be doing. But the
movement of her arm continued and her hand passed right through the cabinet
to end up at her side. Her companions stared in disbelief. It was there, they all
saw it, apparently as solid as their own bodies, and yet the girl’s hand had made
no contact with anything.

‘You see?’ Vicki said, ‘There isn’t anything there to touch.’ She turned
back to look at the Doctor. He was still frowning deeply but now it was one of
concentration as he considered this latest phenomenon. He recognised none of
the artifacts displayed inside this particular cabinet. There was nothing, as far
as he could see, to indicate their period, point of origin, or function, if function
they had. Were they from a time and place of which he had no knowledge? They
could be ornamental, though somehow he doubted it. He could take them back
to the TARDIS for analysis and identification, but how did one transport and
analyse an optical illusion? ‘Incredible,’ he muttered, ‘quite, quite incredible.’

‘What do you make of it?’ Ian had finally found his voice but his question
merely irritated the Doctor further simply because he had no answer.

‘I don’t make anything of it!’ he snapped.
‘Of course, there really is something there,’ Vicki volunteered, looking

around and hoping, in her turn, for some confirmation. She didn’t like to think
she might be hallucinating. ‘We can all see it! Can’t we?’

‘You should know better than to make rash statements like that,’ the Doctor
replied, transferring his irritation to the ingenious Vicki who immediately looked
suitably abashed.

But Ian leapt to Vicki’s defence. ‘Rash?’ he demanded. ‘Who wouldn’t
make rash statements considering the pickle we’re in?

‘Pickle?’ The Doctor responded as though the idea they were in any danger
had never entered his head. ‘What pickle?’

‘The pickle of playing twenty questions and having none of the answers,’
Ian replied. He started to count them off on his fingers. ‘Where are we? And
don’t say in a museum. I want to know where the museum is. Why did the time
clock malfunction? Why did our footprints disappear seconds after we’d made
them? Why can’t we be heard when we make a noise and why can’t we hear
others when they speak? Why do we see objects that aren’t there and...’

‘All right, all right,’ the Doctor held up a placating hand. ‘I apologise to
Vicki. She did not make a rash statement. At least, she didn’t mean to, and I’m
sure the answers...’

Ian felt suddenly drained. Although his breathing had returned to normal
minutes after entering the museum, his legs began to feel very shaky and he
started to lower himself onto a handy plinth in order to take a rest. He was half
way to a sitting position when he straightened up again. If the plinth weren’t
actually there hewas going to look a right clown sprawled across the floor. ‘Well,



what about this then?’ He walked over to another cabinet and placed his hand on
it. It was as insubstantial as the first. His hand passed right through it. He raised
and lowered his hand a number of times. ‘It feels very odd,’ he said, ‘Just as
if there were nothing there. Though Vicki’s right, of course,’ he insisted, ‘there
must be something there.’

‘She is not right.’ A note of real anxiety had now crept into the Doctor’s
voice. There was inherent danger in the situation and his mind was racing. But
still he could not come up with an answer.

By now, Barbara had wandered off on her own to select another cabinet and
experience for herself the peculiar sensation of trying to touch something that
was not there. The cabinet was a tall one containing a NASA spacesuit of the
latter part of the twentieth century. The suit appeared to be in pristine condition.
Barbara stared at the small Stars and Stripes on the chest and the name tag which
readDAVIDHARTWELL. Shewonderedwhat had happened toDavidHartwell
that his suit had ended up here. Her glance travelled upwards to the helmet: to
the opaque, almost black visor staring back at her; ominous, menacing. For a
moment she imagined there was still someone in there, watching her. Did she
see the suit move? Her heartbeat quickened. She took a deep breath and slowly
extended her arm, her trembling fingers reaching out towards the case. She
touched the surface - nothing. She touched the suit - nothing. Her hand went
straight through it all. Ian walked around to the opposite side and put his own
hand through to grasp hers and, together, they walked free of the cabinet.

‘What about that!’ He cried, and Vicki, sensing his excitement, couldn’t
resist having another go herself.

‘Watch me then!’ She commanded and jauntily approached another tall
cabinet containing an upright creature of saurian ugliness; a creature that, under
normal circumstances, would most probably have terrified her out of her mind.
Her air of happy confidence was bought to an abrupt halt when, with a little cry
of pain, she slammed head first into an obviously solid object. Barbara and Ian
burst out laughing, and even theDoctor couldn’t resist a smile, as Vicki staggered
back and stood there, ruefully rubbing her forehead.

‘Well, that one’s solid all right,’ Ian exclaimed, stating the painfully
obvious. Vicki glared at him. Her fright and the bump on her forehead were no
laughing matter.

‘So is this one,’ Barbara added, running her hand over the surface of another
cabinet.

‘Are you all right, Vicki?’ There was concern in the Doctor’s voice.
‘I think so,’ Vicki nodded, though now she was tenderly touching the bruise

on her forehead.
‘That’s a lesson to you all not to take things for granted.’ The Doctor hoped

he didn’t sound too pompous or self-righteous. Why was it he so often sounded
that way when all he wanted to do was give good advice? He smiled benignly,
hoping this would soften the expression, but no-one seemed to be paying any
attention anyway. Vicki was still teasing her hurt, Ian was edging his way against
a wall, examining it carefully, and Barbara seemed to be lost in thought. ‘It’s
beyond me,’ she said eventually, shaking her head. ‘Why should some of these
things have substance and not others?’



‘At least, the building appears to be solid.’ Ian pressed heavily with both
palms against the wall. ‘But, I agree, it doesn’t seem to make any sense.’ He
turned away from the wall and started tomove back towards his companions. But
he hadn’t taken more than a couple of steps when, with a sudden yell, he pitched
forward and sprawled face down on the floor. Before anyone could move, he
rolled over and sat up, moaning and rubbing his shin. ‘There’s something there,’
he groaned. ‘There’s something there in that empty space.’ He rolled up his
trouser leg to reveal a half inch cut on his shin and a bruise developing on the
swelling surrounding it. ‘Look at that!’ he cried, pointing to the wounded leg
which, to his secret satisfaction, was beginning to look rather gory. Ian let out
another groan but, as nobody was making any attempt to baby him, he rolled
down the trouser leg, got to his knees, leaned forward and gingerly stretched out
his hand. Nothing. He tried again to one side, a little too forcibly and let out
another yell, hastily withdrawing his hand and shaking his fingers. ‘Now I’ve
dislocated my finger!’ he bawled, massaging his knuckle.

‘Don’t be such a big baby,’ Barbara said with some exasperation.
‘All men are when they’re hurt,’ Vicki proclaimed with all the wisdom of

her years and somewhat enjoying Ian’s discomforture. He scowled at her and
reached out again, with a little more caution this time.

‘It’s cold to the touch, metal I would say.’ He put out his other hand and
his fingers curled around the invisible object. ‘Cylindrical.’ His hands moved
up. ‘Quite tall.’ His hands moved down and then horizontally outwards. They
watched him, fascinated. ‘And this is what it’s standing on. This is what caught
my shin.’ He turned and looked up at the Doctor. ‘Well?’ he enquired, ‘And what
do you make of that?’

‘There will be a logical explanation. There is a logical explanation for
everything.’ The Doctor assumed an urbane manner, trying to make up for his
earlier testiness, though he was still deeply worried. ‘It is merely a matter of
taking the facts you know and putting them together to make another... fact...
logical... fact. Let’s find out what we have: firstly, we all have a black-out and,
when we come to, we find the clock has isolated itself; then we find ourselves
on a planet which gives every appearance of being nothing but a giant museum,
where half the objects are solid and half are not, and some are solid but invisible,
where we can see the inhabitants but can’t hear them, and where we seem to be
invisible to them.’

‘You’ve left out the footprints,’ Ian remarked dryly. ‘And the glass of
water!’ Vicki added.

The Doctor looked at Barbara, waiting for her to add her pennyworth, but
she shook her head. ‘So, what have we got then?’ He nodded his head and rubbed
the side of his nose. They waited expectantly for the facts to produce another
fact but, when they failed to do so, Ian decided to spur things on.

‘Well?’ he enquired.
The Doctor continued to nod his head and rub his nose. Then he stopped

the rubbing and tapped with his forefinger instead. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I think I’ve
got it.’ But, before he could say what it was he had got, Vicki broke in with an
urgent whisper.



‘There’s someone coming!’ She indicated the doorway at the end of the
room, being the only one in a position to see through it, and hurriedly moving
out of that position.

‘Good,’ the Doctor replied, ‘We might have a little more luck this time.’
‘Aren’t we going to hide?’ It was Barbara, now showing more than a trace

of anxiety.
But the Doctor was all complacency. ‘Bearing in mind what happened last

time we met the inhabitants of this planet there doesn’t appear to be much point
in hiding. Remember, we’re invisible,’ he said, giving them all the benefit of
his most reassuring smile which didn’t reassure them at all. They turned back
to look towards the doorway just as one of the young men they had seen earlier
reappeared walking towards them. He still seemed apprehensive, glancing over
his shoulder as though afraid of being followed. He was closing in on them fast.

‘Start talking,’ the Doctor commanded.
‘What for?’ Ian responded with some surprise. The Doctor really could be

most extraordinary at times. Here they were on an unknown planet, faced with
a creature who looked human but who, in all probability was not, and they were
expected to start a conversation? Even if they did, the chance of the young man
speaking English was probably billions to one, and they had already experienced
their inability to hear him anyway. He felt the question was perfectly justified.
The Doctor, on the other hand, did not.

‘Do as’ you’re told!’ he snapped. Why was everyone being so disobedient?
‘If they can’t see us, let’s try and make them hear us.’ He stepped into the path
of the oncoming youth, waved his arms violently, and yelled; ‘Hey, you! You
there! Stop!’ But the youth came on, looking straight towards the Doctor but
seemingly oblivious to his presence, and the Doctor stepped aside to let him pass.
Ian didn’t. The youth was approaching the other doorway when Ian ran ahead
of him, turned, and planted himself firmly in his path. Ian saw every feature
distinctly; the fair hair, the pale grey eyes, the grim expression on the slightly
gaunt face. They were almost nose to nose. The next step and the boy would
bump into him. But he didn’t. Instead he walked straight through Ian and
disappeared into the adjoining room. Ian swung around to stare at his receding
back and then turned around again to face the others. There was a shocked silence
finally broken by Ian finding only part of his voice.

‘Did you see that?’ He squeaked, as if they could have missed it. ‘Did you
see that? He walked right through me!’

‘Of course he did,’ the Doctor replied, as though it were a perfectly natural
and everyday occurrence. ‘You’re not here. Let’s follow him. He may provide
an answer to the whole mystery. Come on or we’ll lose him.’ The Doctor was
already on his way and the others dutifully fell in behind, but not very happily.

‘All right, but I’d like to know what it is we’re following,’ Ian complained.
‘There isn’t much point in following something that isn’t there.’

‘Don’t be tiresome, Ian.’ The Doctor’s stride never lessened. ‘I didn’t say
he wasn’t here. I said you’re not here.’

‘Oh, really?’ was the rejoinder. ‘Then just where am I supposed to be?’
‘I’ve told you about time dimensions before. Now do keep up. I don’t want

to lose sight of that young man.’ And the Doctor disappeared through the
doorway.



Ian stopped dead and turned an aggrieved face towards the girls: ‘What’s
he on about? He never said anything to me about time dimensions.’

‘I don’t remember ever hearing anything about it,’ Barbara agreed.
‘How about you, Vicki?’ Ian turned to her.
‘Oh yes,’ she replied, with a slight air of smugness, ‘I know all about it.’
‘Do you now?’ Legs astride, Ian placed his fists on his hips in the manner

of Holbein’s Henry the Eighth. It was meant to look impressive and accompany
the slight note of sarcasm in his voice. ‘Then maybe you’ll be so good as to
enlighten us.

‘Certainly,’ was the confident response. Vicki wasn’t in the least impressed
with Ian’s heroic stance. In fact, she thought it looked rather ridiculous. ‘He was
referring to the four dimensions of time. Time, like space, although a dimension
in itself, also has dimensions of its own. We are existing in one dimension and
that boy is in another. All right?’

Ian cast a slightly perplexed glance towards Barbara and then looked back
at Vicki. ‘Not really,’ he said.

She smiled. ‘And you a school teacher.’
‘All right, there’s no need to get hoity-toity,’ Ian snorted,
‘Well, it’s like this...’ Vicki said with elaborate patience, as though

solemnly explaining some simple fact of life to a small child, ‘What we’re seeing
hasn’t happened yet, and we can’t be seen because we’re... Oh, it is a little
confusing, isn’t it?’

Ian responded with a satisfied smirk before Barbara’s interjection wiped it
from his face. ‘I think we’d best get after the Doctor,’ she suggested. ‘And let
him explain.’ She moved quickly towards the doorway and the other two, unable
to resist a sly glance at each other, followed.

They did not have far to go. The Doctor was standing only a few yards away
inside the adjoining room. Arms folded across his chest he was engrossed in a
pantomime being played out before him. This roomwas vast and the exhibits in it
much larger. Among them, suspended from the ceiling, was a space shuttle - The
Robert E. Lee - and, beneath it a number of young men, all in the black uniform,
were engaged in what looked like a heated debate. In their midst was the boy
who, only a few minutes earlier, had nearly given Ian a heart attack by passing
right through him. He was talking excitedly and pointing in the direction from
which he had come and where the travellers were standing. The Doctor noticed
his companions had joined him and inclined his head in the youth’s direction.

‘As you’ll notice,’ he said, ‘he didn’t get very far. It would appear to be
some sort of big pow-wow,’ - the Doctor was obviously under the influence of
The Robert E. Lee - ‘And that boy is trying to impress something on the others.’

‘Why don’t we get closer?’ Ian suggested. ‘They can’t see us.
‘Yes, I know,’ was the answer, ‘but there’s no point in tempting fate. We

don’t know anything about them or how they would react to us so it wouldn’t do
to suddenly materialise in their midst, now would it?’

‘Materialise!’ Ian cried. ‘What are you talking about? I’m here, I’m real,
I’m solid. I talk, I feel, I breathe, I’m alive!My leg hurts. The pain is real. Cogito,
ergo sum. Quod Brat demonstrandum. I don’t have to materialise!’

‘Yes you do,’ the Doctor replied calmly, pointing to the group of young
men. ‘To them, when you arrive. So, we’ll just stay here and watch.’



‘Why do you think that one keeps pointing through there?’ Barbara asked.
‘Do you think he’s found the TARDIS?’

Of course not. If we haven’t arrived, the TARDIS hasn’t arrived.’
‘Would someone please tell me what is going on!’ Ian insisted with

increasing impatience. ‘Look, about this time dimension thing...’
‘Not now, Chesterton. We’ll just keep watching and see how events turn

out.’
Ian folded his arms and gazed around the room. ‘I don’t know about anyone

else,’ he said, ‘but I get a bit tired of dumb show after a while.’ And, as though
to prove his point, he glanced over his shoulder. His arms fell to his sides. ‘Oh,
heck!’ he whispered, ‘We’re in trouble. Doctor!’ He grabbed the Doctor’s sleeve
and they all turned. Marching towards them, through the room they had just left,
was a squad of white uniforms, led by one who was obviously their officer and
who already had his weapon drawn. ‘What do we do now?’ Ian hissed.

‘Nothing,’ the Doctor replied.
‘Well, I don’t fancy all that lot barging right through me.’
‘Then get out of the way and against the wall,’ the Doctor suggested.
‘ They backed into the room and moved to one side as the guards, soldiers,

or whatever they were, came to a halt just inside the doorway.
‘This is what the boy was trying to tell the others,’ the Doctor whispered,

‘And, for some reason, they wouldn’t listen to him.’
‘What can we do?’ Ian asked.
‘By the look on that man’s face,’ the Doctor indicated the leader, ‘I would

say it’s too late to do anything.’ And the officer indeed looked as though he was
going to enjoy what was about to happen.

The group beneath the space shuttle were standing silently, at least they
were no longer talking, facing the soldiers, and the grim-faced squad looked back
at them for what seemed to the travellers like an eternity. Then, suddenly, one
of the youths bolted, running for the safety of a small door half-way down the
length of one wall. The officer smiled, raised his arm, and a pencil thin ray of
vivid blue light momentarily joined the two men before the fugitive was hurled
into the air and crashed lifeless to the floor.

There was no battle. It was a massacre and all over in seconds. Only one
youth remained alive, the one who had come to warn the others. There was
simply no point in his trying to do anything. He stood stockstill as two soldiers
advanced on him, seized him by the arms and manhandled him out of the room.
The squad did an about turn and marched away. The officer, still smiling, took
one last look around the room, at the dozen bodies sprawled grotesquely across
the floor, then he turned and followed his men.

‘That was horrible! Horrible!’ Vicki was crying and Barbara tried to
comfort her, holding the young girl tight and caressing her hair soothingly.

‘Don’t let it upset you, Vicki,’ she said softly, ‘It wasn’t really happening.
But it was! It was!’ Vicki cried.
‘Yes, indeed it was,’ the Doctor agreed. ‘Or, rather, it will. It might happen

tomorrow, it might happen in a few years time, it might take place within
minutes, but happen it most certainly will unless...’

‘What are we going to do?’ Ian broke in, his tone betraying his shock and
fear.



‘We follow those soldiers, for want of a better word to describe them,’ the
Doctor replied. ‘Providing nothing extraordinary happens that allows them or us
to break through the field of time dimension, we’ll come to no harm. This way.’

They started to go but Ian could not resist a last look at the room where he
had just witnessed such violence.

‘Doctor, look!’ He cried. The others turned back.
The bodies had disappeared.
‘It’s no good,’ Ian said, ‘Let’s face it, we have no idea which way they went

and this place is like a maze or a rabbit warren. I’m completely lost. Does anyone
recognise anything?’

Vicki pointed through a doorway. ‘Isn’t that the roomwe were in first?’ she
asked. ‘I think it is. I think that’s the case I bumped my head on. I mean, who
could forget a hideous creature like that?’

‘His mother probably loved him,’ Ian chuckled, almost back to his old
jocular self. ‘But then, on second thoughts

Vicki was moving cautiously towards the doorway. ‘But there’s something
different about it,’ she said. And then, pointing excitedly: ‘Look!’

There, in the centre of the room, stood the TARDIS. Ian was the first to
recover from the surprise. ‘Now, how did that get in here?’ he almost yelled.

‘And what does this do for your theory, Doctor?’ Barbara asked.
‘It supports it,’ was the brusque reply.
‘Whether it supports it or not,’ Ian argued, ‘Now that we have found the

TARDIS, or it has found us, whichever way you care to look at it, wemust decide
here and now what we’re going to do.’ Then: ‘That’s what I think,’ he added as
an apologetic afterthought.

‘I think we should take it as a stroke of luck and leave at once,’ Barbara
suggested.

Ian eagerly seconded the motion.
The Doctor turned to Vicki. ‘How do you feel, young lady?’ he asked.
‘I can’t help thinking how awful it was back there.. those poor men.’
‘Yes, yes, all very upsetting. And, as much as I would like to stay and

unravel the strange events we have witnessed, I feel like you. The sooner we
move away from this planet the better. And yet I also have a dreadful feeling it’s
not going to he that easy. Well...’ - he waved an airy hand towards the ‘TARDIS
- ‘Lead the way, Chesterton.’

It was only when Ianwas at arm’s length from the TARDIS that he suddenly
realised what the Doctor had meant. He turned back to look at the others.

‘Well, go on.’ The Doctor encouraged.
‘It’s not there,’ Ian said to himself, facing the Ship, ‘I know it. It just isn’t

there. Tentatively he reached out. His fingers met no resistance from the solid-
looking blue police box.

‘I should have known it, as soon as I saw it standing there.’
Ian heard the Doctor’s voice behind him. We’re never going to get away

from here, he thought and, as if to confirm his feelings of hopelessness, there
was a sudden piercing scream from Vicki. Ian swung around, as did Barbara and
the Doctor, and Ian felt the hair prickle on his scalp as they gazed in horror at
what they saw.



Against one wall, previously unnoticed in the excitement of discovering
the TARDIS, stood four transparent domed casings, in shape like those the
Victorians used to house dried flower arrangments or stuffed birds and animals.
But the animals in the four casings were Ian, Barbara, Vicki, and the Doctor.



3 Discovery

It took some time for the shock to wear off and it was Barbara who, in a
stunned whisper, broke the silence.

‘Those... things... They’re us. Not models, not pictures... They’re us.’
‘Yes,’ the Doctor said. ‘Exhibits in a museum.’
Ian turned to him. ‘Isn’t it about time you started putting those facts

together, Doctor?’ His voice was trembling.
Now it was Vicki’s turn to whisper, almost to herself. ‘Time, like space,

although a dimension in itself, also has dimensions of its own,’ she repeated.
The Doctor raised both eyebrows and gave a little nod.
‘Oh, so you know all about it, do you? You must have gone to a more

enlightened school than these two taught at.’ ‘This is hardly the time for throwing
insults about, Doctor,’ Ian huffed.

"We’re really in those cases,’ Vicki continued, mesmerised by her image
staring back at her, almost oblivious to the others. ‘We’re just looking at
ourselves from this dimension.

Barbara shrugged. ‘It’s horrible. "Those faces - our faces - just staring.’
‘Does it explain all that’s been happening to us?’ Ian asked.
Of course it does.’ The Doctor took hold of his coat lapels and raised his

chin slightly, a sure indication that he was about to pontificate. ‘If you’re not
there you can’t f leave footprints, can you? Or touch things.’

‘And you can’t be seen,’ Ian added.
‘Oh, you can be seen, my boy, you most certainly can be seen.’ The Doctor

released one lapel to point towards the cases. ‘There!’
‘Doctor...’ Barbara moved to his side. ‘Is there any way of getting out of

this mess?’
The Doctor was fascinated by his Doppelganger and couldn’t take his eyes

off himself. He moved in closer, leaning forward to peer into the case. ‘Well,
we got into it Barbara, I suppose there must be some way of trying to get out
of it.’ He straightened up and cocked his head to one side. ‘I’ve never had an
opportunity before of studying the 1 fourth dimension at close hand. Fascinating.
Quite fascinating.’ He let go of the other lapel and, holding his hands in front
of him, tapped his fingertips together. ‘The TARDIS must have jumped a time
track. Extraordinary. Passed through into that dimension, this dimension, another
dimension, which dimension?’ He cleared his throat. ‘Er... yes... Extraordinary.
Hrnm...’

He looked around at the others all waiting eagerly for his conclusion so he
took hold of his lapels again and this time his chin rose so high he was looking at
the ceiling. ‘There are obvious dangers of course but the answer is quite simple
really.’

‘Oh, I’m relieved to hear it,’ Ian said. ‘How simple?’ ‘Just a question of
waiting, my boy,’ was the simple answer.

‘Waiting? For what?’
‘Waiting for us to arrive.’ The Doctor stopped investigating himself and,

turning around, spread his arms wide to illustrate the simplicity of the solution.



‘Pardon?’ Barbara squeaked disbelievingly.
‘My dear Barbara, before we were actually put in those cases we must have

landed here in the TARDIS, been seen by these people and considered worthy
enough subjects to grace their museum. But none of that has happened yet. What
we are looking at, as with that fracas we saw earlier, is a glimpse into the future.
Everything that leads up to it’ he indicated the four cases - ‘is yet to come.’

‘Couldn’t we just go back to the TARDIS? The real one, I mean, and take
off again?’ Vicki pleaded.

‘And run the risk of ending up like that?’ the Doctor thundered. ‘No, no,
child, we must stay and face it, stop it from happening.’

‘When do you suppose we might arrive?’ Ian couldn’t help feeling the
question was a little on the ludicrous side since he was actually doing the asking
but it was obvious his other body couldn’t do the questioning. Even had it been
animate there would have been no aural contact.

But the Doctor didn’t laugh. He merely shrugged.
‘And how will we know when we have?’ Barbara persisted. ‘When we will

have arrived, I mean.
‘Those’ - again the Doctor indicated the bizarre exhibits, ‘will disappear

and we will become visible. We will he able to hear the inhabitants of this place
and be heard by them. And, when we touch something, it will be there.’

‘And we’re just going to wait?’ Ian spread his hands in an imitation of one
of the Doctor’s gestures.

‘Can you think of something better?’
‘We could die of starvation!’ Ian argued. ‘Maybe that’s what happened.

Maybe that’s how we ended up in... those!’
The Doctor shook his head. ‘I don’t think so,’ he reasoned. ‘If you will

look again you will see we are wearing the same clothes, here...’ - he pointed
to himself

‘and there.’ He gestured towards the cases. ‘And if you look more closely,
specifically at Ian’s right trouser leg, the lower half, you will see a small
bloodstain... Here... And there. No, I don’t think we’ll have too long to wait.’

Hands clasped behind his back, Lobos strolled slowly around the
laboratory, trying to find something to arouse his interest and break themonotony
of his existence. All his life he had been a fighter but, unlike a great many
warriors, Lobos had a keen and enquiring mind. Winning battles had never been
enough. Hewanted to see everything, feel everything, learn everything. And here
he was on this forsaken planet, his mind stultifying.

Nothing new had been added to the museum to excite his imagination and
he was bored, bored, bored. He had done well for the Empire, earned himself
considerable honours and yet, one tiny indiscretion, and this was his reward, to
be banished to Xeros, the dullest planet in the Empire.

Oh, they could say it was putting the old warhorse out to graze - now where
in Nuada had he picked up an expression like that? He tried to remember but it
was no use. In a life and career as long as his, one picked up all sorts of things -
but, whichever way you looked at it, it was banishment.

One tiny indiscretion. All right, maybe it hadn’t been that tiny, but a Morok
has a heart hasn’t he? Two, as a matter of fact. By the great Ork, at least his term



as Governor was nearly over. Only one more metone, if he lasted that long, and
he could go home.

Lobos saw in his mind’s eye the beautiful shining city from which he had
been so craftily exiled, and the beautiful face of the one who had been the cause
of that exile. He suddenly thumped the work surface in front of him with the
side of his fist, sending a tremor down its entire length, and causing the young
technician working close by to visibly flinch. Lobos sighed and moved on. It was
enough to make a lesser Morok very bitter. Something... something... anything
to break the hideous monotony.

He stopped in front of a scanner and passed his hand across the screen.
That same dreary landscape. Those same dreary, crumbling relics that no one
visited any more. Except for the labour ship on its regular tour of duty, bringing
supplies and taking back with it the requisite number of Xeron slaves and his
reports - reports that had nothing to say and which no-one probably took any
notice of anyway - he couldn’t remember when last he saw a new face. Who
was it? He racked his brains. Oh, yes, the Ometec Ambassador, and he couldn’t
get away fast enough. Not that he was all that bright anyway. If he had stayed
the conversation would have languished soon enough. He passed his hand over
the screen again to see if there was anything new to look at elsewhere. Not that
he really expected it but one never could tell. There could be visitors, maybe
someone he could have an intelligent conversation with. His second-in-
command didn’t have the brains of a Flebbit and they were brainless enough.
You could transplant twenty Flebbit brains into a Morok’s skull and there would
still be room inside for a Garnbo to orbit.

Nothing. The space station was deserted. Xeros was the forgotten planet,
left to rot. This once great monument to the glories of the mightyMorok Empire:
their civilisation, achievements, conquests; rotting and forgotten, just as he felt
himself to be rotting and forgotten.

He lowered himself heavily into the seat in front of the scanner. Maybe,
later, he could have a game of chess with his favourite robot, Matt. Chess
fascinated him, ever since he had accidentally discovered a set tucked away in
storage - who knows how long it had been there? - and wondered what it could
be. Obviously a pastime of some kind, but fromwhere? Andwhat were the rules?
Having decided it was a game of attack, defence, and counter-attack, it excited
his military mind and he eventually threw it to Matt and told the robot to get on
with sorting it out. Mau did just that - in.00001 of a second. And then offered
Lobos a game. For a while chess was a total obsession and, even when the
obsession wore off, Lobos could never be bored playing withMatt for the simple
reason that he was never able to win. Matt was the first adversary who had him
totally licked and, no matter how much he studied, how hard he tried, he could
not win. It was probably just as well. Had he ever beaten Matt, the game would
have lost its fascination. Yes, maybe he would have a game later.

He sighed wearily and passed his hand over the screen to change the
location. Then he sat, looking but not seeing, lost in a thousand thoughts.

‘Where’s Vicki?’ The Doctor had taken in the room even before the echo
of his call had died away.

Startled, the others glanced around as well. There was no sign of Vicki.
For a while they had been wandering about the room, examining the exhibits



and only occasionally aware of each other. One minute Vicki was there and, it
seemed, the next minute she was gone.

‘She probably got bored and wandered off,’ Barbara suggested.
‘Expressly against my orders. Now, more than ever, we should stay

together.’ And chuntering angrily to himself the Doctor marched off and into
the next room. The other two quickly followed and they found themselves in
a long gallery filled with models and illustrations of planetary systems. They
moved cautiously down the centre of the gallery keeping a sharp look-out for
the errant Vicki.

‘What could have happened to her?’ Ian grumbled. ‘She couldn’t have got
very far.’

There was a sudden gasp from Barbara and she pointed to the far end of the
gallery where a wide, arched opening revealed a corridor running at right angles
to the room they were in.

‘There she is!’
The Doctor and Ian turned towards the corridor where they saw Vicki being

dragged along by two of the white uniforms. She was struggling desperately and
obviously screaming but the trio could hear nothing. ‘Do something!’ Barbara
cried.

‘There’s nothing we can do,’ the Doctor said. Barbara turned a desperate
pleading face to Ian. He needed no second bidding.

‘Ian! Come back!’ The Doctor shouted, but it was too late. Ian was already
in the corridor and, with the advantage of surprise, had barged into the two
captors and sent them crashing to the floor before they even knew what hit them.
Barbara and the Doctor saw him yelling at Vicki, pulling and then pushing her
in their direction and Vicki ran back into the gallery, throwing herself at Barbara
and sobbing hysterically.

The guards, now recovered and back on their feet, stood glaring at Ian who
started to back slowly towards the gallery. In a second they had drawn their
weapons but, as they raised them to fire, a look of total astonishment appeared
on their faces. Ian had stepped back into the gallery and, as far as the Moroks
were concerned, disappeared.

His heart thumping like a kettledrum, Ian staggered back to the others on
rubberised legs. His hands were trembling and he could hardly speak but, ‘Phew!
That was too close for comfort,’ he chuckled with relief. ‘Well done, Chesterton,
my boy. Well done!’ The Doctor beamed. But the congratulations were cut short
by a low warning from Barbara: ‘Doctor...’

The Moroks had entered the gallery and were slowly advancing, peering
left and right for the magically disappearing fugitive. The four time-travellers
retreated in apprehension. But, after a while, the searchers gave up their hopeless
quest and, shaking their heads in disbelief, started to go. At the arch they could
not resist one last look around the gallery and then, with shrugging shoulders,
disappeared.

‘That’s certainly given them something to think about,’ Ian said.
Barbara giggled nervously. ‘They’ll never work out what happened,’ she

said. ‘You could almost feel sorry for them.’
‘No, no!’ Vicki cried, ‘They were horrible!’
‘Yes, Vicki. I’m sorry.’



‘Teach you to disobey orders and go wandering about on your own like
that,’ the Doctor chided her. ‘Created quite a little drama, didn’t you?’

‘And how do you explain that little drama?’ Ian asked.
‘It’s quite simple,’ the Doctor began, but Ian was still suffering from the

shock of being an impulsive hero and staring oblivion in the face, and was in no
mood for any more simplicity.

‘Whenever you say something is quite simple,’ he blurted out, ‘it turns out
to be the most complicated thing ever. Whenever I hear you say "It’s quite
simple" I prepare for the worst.’

‘But it is!’ the Doctor insisted. ‘You both entered and came back from the
fourth dimension, that’s all.’

‘That’s all. It couldn’t have been sheer coincidence, I suppose, that we
happened to step in and out again when things began to get really difficult.’

‘Of course not. Your experience merely substantiates my theory that there
is accidental mechanical interference on this planet. It would appear to be in
patches, like fog, and like fog, it comes and goes. At the moment that corridor
through there seems to be a location. In here there could be people all around
us at this very moment but we are unaware of them because they are in their
dimension while we are in ours.’

‘But we’re not!’ Ian almost exploded. ‘We’re in both! We’re here but we
haven’t arrived. We’ve arrived but we’re not here. I think I’m getting a
headache.’

‘It’s quite sim...’ The Doctor stopped himself and coughed. ‘Crossed wires,
dear boy. Crossed wires. But I also think what has just happened presages our
imminent arrival and we really ought to get back to the other room and keep an
eye...’ He couldn’t resist a little more teasing - ‘on our other selves.’

‘I suddenly feel very sleepy,’ Vicky said, unsuccessfully trying to stifle a
yawn and forgetting to put her hand over her mouth until the very last moment.
‘Pardon.’

‘Oh, Vicki,’ Barbara said, ‘you can’t be. We all had that marvellous sleep
before we landed.’

‘We haven’t landed yet.’ Ian was determined to continue the argument.
‘And, if we have, then I’m Rip van Winkle and I haven’t a clue as to what is
going on.’

‘I can’t help it,’ Vicki insisted, ‘I really am tired.’ And she yawned again,
this time remembering her manners. "S’funny,’ Ian said, ‘so am I.’

The Doctor, who was leading the way, stopped and turned back. ‘That’s
very interesting,’ he observed.

‘You always show the greatest interest in the least important things,’ Ian
growled sulkily.

‘It’s the apparently least important things that sometime lead to the greatest
discoveries. Steam corning out of a kettle, hey? An apple falling on your head,
hey? Floating in a hot bath, hey?’

‘Hey?’
The Doctor raised his right fist and jabbed his forefinger at the ceiling.

‘Eureka, my young friend. Eureka!’
‘Touche,’ was the rejoinder. Ian was too tired to argue anymore.



‘Yes,’ the Doctor said, continuing on his way, ‘I remember, I was sitting
on the edge of the bath at the time and we were discussing... What were we
discussing?... Oh, yes! The cost of living and the exorbitant cost of figs. Almost
tripled in price they had, in a matter of months. Terrible, terrible.’

‘What is he going on about?’ Vicki whispered to Barbara.
‘Recollections of a dim and distant past,’ Barbara answered.
‘Never mind the dim and distant past,’ Ian snarled, it’s the dim and distant

future we’re supposed to be worrying about.’ And he yawned mightily just as
they went through into the other room.

‘Your tiredness;’ the Doctor said, getting back on track and to his original
interest, ‘obviously has something to do with moving into another dimension.
How do you feel, Barbara?’

‘I’m wide awake,’ she replied.
‘So am I. Remind me to make some notes about this.’
‘I hate to interrupt,’ Ian interrupted, ‘but Vicki and I are almost dead on our

feet.’ And, in truth, they could hardly keep their eyes open and the yawning had
become incessant.

‘My dear boy, forgive me, scientific curiosity, you know. You can rest in
here.’

Through half-closed eyelids Ian peered around the room. The TARDIS and
the domed cases were still there. Iie lowered himself wearily to the floor and
stretched out. ‘Wake me when we arrive,’ he murmured and was almost
immediately fast asleep. Vicki, already curled up into a little ball, was ahead of
him. Barbara lay down beside her and the Doctor stood where he was, obviously
lost in thought.

Lobos leaned forward and changed the picture once more. Suddenly he
stiffened and peered intently at the screen. Therewas something there, something
he had never seen before. Two of his men were walking around it. Then one,
pointing to the ground, said something to the other who joined him and they
jabbered excitedly before turning back and resuming their examination of the
strange contraption.

‘You!’ Lobos bellowed at the young technician who, in terror, dropped the
exhibit he was working on and totally ruined a hundred Morok-hours of work.

‘What’s that?’ Lohos demanded, stabbing a stubby finger at the screen.
‘Wh-wh-what, sir?’
‘That, you idiot! That!’ Lobos grabbed the youth by his collar and

practically jammed his nose against the scanner.
‘I don’t know, sir. I don’t reco-recollect ever seeing it before.’
‘Well, have you seen anything like it?’
‘N-n-n-no, sir, never, sir.’ Much to the young Morok’s relief, Lobos let go

of his collar, and he surreptitiously backed away out of arm’s reach. It was at
this point that the door to the laboratory slid silently open and a soldier hurried
in. Lobos turned and glared at him. The soldier saluted.

‘I am supposed to be the Governor of this wretched planet,’ Lohos
grumbled. ‘And you’re supposed to show some respect and announce yourself.’

‘I’m sorry, sir, but the matter’s urgent.’
‘Not so urgent that you forget your place.’



‘Yes, sir. I apologise, sir.’ The soldier stared straight ahead, waiting for the
blow to fall.

Lobos looked the creature up and down and felt some sympathy for him.
Maybe the poor fellow was as bored as he was and here, at last, was something
to get excited about.

‘Well?’ He barked. ‘Out with it then. What is this matter that’s so urgent?’
The soldier almost sighed with relief. ‘We’ve had a report that a ship has

landed, sir.’
‘I am well aware that a ship has landed.’ Lobos waved towards the scanner

without bothering to turn and look at it. ‘And it isn’t a ship from home.Wewould
have had advance notification.’ By Ork, he was beginning to sound more and
more like a civil servant.

‘No, sir. It’s an alien vessel.’
‘Well, well, well, what a red letter day...’
Now where had he picked up that expression? -’... for the Xeron calendar.

Have the crew been detained?’ ‘No, sir. We have been unable to gain
admission...’ ‘Admission?’

‘Entry, sir, entry. Unable to gain entry.’
Lobos glowered with such ferocity that the soldier decided he had better

get his message across and get out of there - fast.
‘But the ship appears to be unmanned, sir. There are tracks leading away

from it and we presume the crew must be somewhere in the museum.’
Lobos moved over to the door and flicked an intercom switch on the wall.

‘Attention all commanders. Attention all commanders. We have uninvited
guests. Organise an immediate search and detain for questioning.’

He flicked off the switch. At last, he thought, something to break the
monotony.

Bo interlaced his fingers and stretched out his arms in front of him, palms
outwards, and cracked his knuckles loudly. hemade funny noises with hismouth,
forcing the air out from between his cheeks and gums. It was a habit that drove
Sita mad and he tried to control his irritation. They were both on tenterhooks
and any reprimand, he knew, would only increase the tension unbearably. But
he turned his head sideways to look at his companion and Bo, realising what he
was doing, immediately stopped and smiled apologetically. Then he sat on his
hands to resist further temptation.

‘What could have happened to him?’ Sita said, using his own hands to put
pressure on his thighs and push himself up from the cannister on which he was
sitting and going towards the door of the tiny chamber to look out. Ahead of
him stretched the vast underground complex that was the heart and lungs of the
museum. The only sound that greeted him was the low hum of machinery and
nothing moved. He turned back. Bo was gazing at him enquiringly. Sita shook
his head and resumed his seat. ‘Something must have happened to him,’ he said.
‘The Moroks have picked him up for questioning...’

‘No!’ Bo shouted. And his hands came together again ready for cracking
knuckles.

‘Nothing gets past them,’ Sita continued. ‘They know everything.’
‘But we’ve been so careful,’ Bo protested, feeling the fear spread from his

solar plexus, reaching out to his toes and fingertips.



‘They know what we’re thinking even before we do. We’re fools. Fools! I
told Tor we wouldn’t get away with it.’ Sita clenched his fists and shook them
in front of him. ‘But we’ve planned,’ Bo whined.

‘Planned? Planned? What have we planned? What kind of rebels are we?
We don’t even have weapons.’ ‘But we do!’ Bo shouted.

Sita waved away the protestation and continued: ‘The fewweapons we have
wouldn’t get us anywhere. Oh, maybe we’d get two or three of them, then it
would be slaughter. Not one of us would be left alive. Not one of us would want
to be left alive.’

‘I suppose some of us must die,’ Bo whispered, ‘but...’
Be quiet!’ Sita yelled. ‘I don’t want to hear it!’ Then he suddenly felt sorry

for his young companion. He was not the stuff fighters, rebels, martyrs, are made
of, and he was gazing at Sita pleading to be reassured. Sita could not reassure
him. He turned away and the sound of knuckles cracking made him close his
eyes and wish fervently he were anywhere but where he was. ‘If he doesn’t come
soon,’ he said softly, ‘we’ll have to call the meeting off. We will be missed.’

‘He’ll be here,’ Bo said, sitting on his hands again. ‘Tor wouldn’t let us
down.’

The Doctor knelt beside Ian and shook his shoulder gently. It took Ian a
long time to come round but, eventually, he groaned, opened his bleary eyes and
immediately closed them again.

‘What’s the matter?’ he yawned and rolled over prepared to go to sleep
again. But the Doctor gave him another shake.

‘You told me to wake you when we arrived,’ he said quietly.
There was amoment and then Ian sat bolt upright, immediately wide awake:

‘What!’
‘Shhhh...’ The Doctor put his finger to his lips. ‘The girls are still asleep.

No need to wake them yet. But, look’.
Ian looked. The TARDIS had gone. So had the four cases. The Doctor stood

up and Ian scrambled hastily to his feet.
‘What...?’ he started, and then remembered that, having arrived, he could

now be heard as well as seen and lowered his voice almost to a whisper. ‘What
do we do now?’

‘Well...’ The Doctor pulled at his lips and cleared his throat. ‘Sooner or later
the TARDIS is going to be discovered, that is, if it already hasn’t, and they’re
going to come looking for us. I suggest we find somewhere to secrete ourselves
while we formulate a plan.’ It was obvious from the Doctor’s diction that he was
desperately awaiting the arrival of a moment of inspiration and that moment was
reluctant to show itself. ‘If we stay here we’ll be caught out in the open, as it
were. Yes, I’ll wake the girls,’ he finished lamely.

‘Right.’ Ian nodded and, as the Doctor knelt beside the sleeping Barbara
and Vicki, he crossed over to a cabinet to examine its contents. He stood in front
of the cabinet and immediately a voice seemed to explode in the room.

‘You are now looking at weapons from the planet Verticulus. They are all
based on the laser principle and though somewhat primitive in concept are
extremely effective at close range. If you look...’



Ian stepped back, his heel coming down heavily on Barbara’s toe. She let
out a gasp and hopped on the other foot, grimacing in pain. ‘Sorry,’ Ian
apologised. He hadn’t realised the others had moved up behind him.

‘So that’s how we find out what it is we’re looking at,’ Vicki observed.
‘Yes,’ agreed the Doctor. ‘There is obviously a sensor that reacts to the

body’s presence and gives out a commentary.’
‘But it’s in English!’ Vicki cried.
‘There will be an explanation for that,’ the Doctor said.
Ian positioned himself on one side of the cabinet and indicated the opposite

side to Barbara. ‘Help me off with the top,’ he ordered.
‘What for?’ Barbara asked, moving into position nevertheless and laying

her hands on the lid.
‘You might set off an alarm,’ Vicki warned.
But Ian ignored her advice and he and Barbara removed the top. ‘If they

still work,’ Ian explained, ‘At least we’ll be armed. And, if they don’t, we might
be able to bluff our way out.’ They laid the lid on the floor and Ian selected a
weapon.

‘Nonsense!’ The Doctor said, ‘We’ve got a serious problem on our hands.
This is no time to be playing cowboys and Indians.’

‘And we don’t want to get out anyway,’ Barbara added. ‘Do we? At least,
not yet.’

‘Well, we can’t stay here, Barbara!’ Vicki almost howled.
‘We’ve got to, Vicki,’ Barbara persisted. ‘We’ve got to break the chain of

events, do whatever we have to, to keep ourselves out of those cases.’
‘I can’t see that staying here would stop it!’
‘Leaving here may be just what we’re not supposed to do,’ Barbara

explained.
‘I’m afraid, my dear, Barbara’s quite right,’ the Doctor said. But Vicki was

not to be convinced.
‘But what if staying here is what we’re not supposed to do?’ she argued.

‘Why don’t we just try and get back to the TARDIS and leave altogether? Then
we won’t have to worry at all about being turned into dummies.’

‘It’s a valid argument, Doctor,’ Ian said. ‘It really is a case of six of one,
half a dozen of t’other.’

‘Not really,’ Barbara chipped in again, ‘Even if we do escape the planet
we would never be quite sure we were really free, or whether we would still
be bound by time, and events in time, which would lead us back here and into
those glass cases. If we stay we might, at least, be able to reshape the future, turn
events to our advantage, make sure we don’t end up like that. Then we could
safely leave.’

‘Hmm... It’s quite a problem, quite a problem,’ the Doctor muttered.
‘All right then,’ Vicki said with finality. ‘You decide.’
‘Decide?’ The Doctor looked quite startled. ‘My dear child, it’s as Ian said,

six of one and half a dozen of the other. Spinning a coin would be as appropriate
as making a decision. Hmm, now let me see...’ The Doctor caressed his chin.
‘What kind of creatures would want to put us in cases for the purpose of display?
I wonder...’

‘He’s curious,’ Barbara whispered to Vicki, ‘that means we stay.’



‘I’ve lost a button,’ Ian said, holding up his arm and looking at his cuff.
He pulled at the remaining thread. ‘Must have been on the cabinet, reaching for
the gun.’

‘Lost a button?’ The Doctor stopped stroking his chin and examined the
sleeve with intense curiosity. ‘Now that’s interesting, very interesting.’

Ian rolled his eyes heavenwards. ‘What is so interesting about losing a
button? People lose buttons, by the millions I shouldn’t wonder. In fact I’m
thinking of taking out shares in the button industry and going around snipping off
people’s buttons.’ The Doctor really did have the most extraordinary convoluted
thought process. Buttons!

‘Don’t be so facetious,’ the Doctor snapped back. ‘Don’t you see, in this
case, a little thing like losing a button can be a clue to our whole course of action,
even our future?’

‘For want of a nail a war was lost,’ Vicki misquoted smugly.
‘What?’ Ian said.
‘For want of a nail a shoe was lost, for want of a shoe a horse was lost, for

want of a horse a battle was lost, for want...’
‘All right, all right,’ the Doctor butted in. ‘Did anyone notice whether or

not the button was missing from the sleeve when we were in the cases? Hmm?
Well, come on! Come on!’

Nobody had. Missing buttons were hardly what they were looking for.
‘Pity, pity,’ the Doctor sighed, shaking his head. ‘Well then, let’s not waste

time here talking. First things first. We will leave this building. Well...’ he
chuckled, ‘a museum is hardly the place for shaping futures, is it?’

Lobos sat at his desk and excitedly switched pictures in quick succession.
He was anxious to get his first glimpse of these aliens. His second-in-command,
Ogrek, stood behind him, watching.

Through the scanner they could see themuseum and its environs were a hive
of activity with white uniforms scurrying about in all directions. Ogrek grunted.
‘We won’t be the only ones looking for them,’ he muttered. ‘They could have
already been found and smuggled into hiding by the rebels.’

‘Rebels?’ Lobos snorted. ‘Rabble, you mean, little more than children.’
‘Children grow up,’ Ogrek commented wryly. ‘And even as children they

can be dangerous.’
‘By then they will be on their way to Morok in the labour ship. And, in the

meantime, if and when they pose a danger, we will destroy them. Nevertheless
you’re right about the fact they might try to make contact. If they do of course...’
he smiled... ‘We’ll bag ‘em all at once, won’t we? In the meantime, send Matt
down to survey that ship and see what he comes up with.’

Tor sped down an alleyway of the underground complex and burst into the
chamber where Bo and Sita were waiting. He was breathing hard; a combination
of exertion, excitement, and fear of discovery. Xerons never ran, except under
orders or suspicious circumstances, and being apprehended would mean
questioning. The waiting duo leapt to their feet, their own hearts thumping, and
Bo almost cried with relief when he saw who it was.

‘Tor! What’s happened?’
Tor held out his hand to indicate he was giving himself a second or two to

regain his breath. Then he looked around to make sure he hadn’t been followed



and, staying by the door, said, ‘The Moroks have discovered a spaceship. It
landed here.’

‘Where?’ Sita asked.
‘Near the Omerion section.’
‘You went outside?’ Bo was aghast that his friend and leader should take

such a risk. Xerons did not move outside their prescribed limits.
‘A ship,’ Sita said unbelievingly. ‘Where from?’
Tor shook his head. ‘Nobody knows. But the crew have left it, that I did

hear.’ He glanced over his shoulder then moved further into the chamber and
continued in a hushed but excited voice. ‘This could be our chance,’ he said.
‘Don’t you see? They will have weapons we can use against the Moroks.’

‘If they’ll agree to help us,’ Sita said doubtfully. ‘And I don’t see any reason
why they should.’

‘They will, Sita, when they hear our story.’
‘Yes,’ Bo agreed.
Sita shook his head. ‘Who knows what they’re like? They could be worse

than the Moroks, then where will we be?’
‘You’re such a pessimist,’ Bo complained, moving closer to Tor to show

where his trust lay. ‘You always look on the dark side.’
‘Not really,’ Sita argued with a slight shrug. ‘It’s just that I am a realist.

Look, you said the Moroks have found the ship. Do you really think we stand a
chance of finding whoever they are before the Moroks do?’

‘Dako has already organised the outside workers,’ Tor replied. ‘Now we
must search in here. O1em and Seng are waiting for us. Come.’ He stood by the
door waiting for Sita to move.

‘Come on, Sita.’ Bo laid a hand on Sita’s shoulder and gave it an
encouraging shake. ‘We’ll find them.’

TheDoctor, leading theway down the corridor, suddenly stopped and raised
his hand. The others dutifully stopped behind him though they couldn’t figure
out exactly why. Except for themselves the corridor was empty and they hadn’t
seen or heard anything suspicious. Ian and Barbara exchanged enquiring glances
and Ian shrugged, then they both turned front again to stare at the back of the
Doctor’s head. Had they been in a position to see his face they would have seen
his eyes move left, then right, then left again, though he took great care to keep
his head absolutely still. Finally he said, ‘You lead now, Chesterton.’

Ian and Barbara exchanged glances again, and smiled, as they both nodded
slowly, realising the Doctor was hopelessly lost and didn’t want to admit it.

‘Certainly, Doctor,’ Ian agreed affably, stepping to the Doctor’s side.
‘Which way? Any particular fancy?’ And the Doctor knew he hadn’t fooled
anybody.

He huffed for a while and then said, ‘Yes - the way we came in of course.’
‘Of course.’ Ian smiled and nodded. ‘And which way did we come in?’
‘Really, young man,’ the Doctor growled. ‘You’ve got a memory like a

sieve. We turn right, then left.’
‘No,’ Vicki contradicted. ‘We turned right when we cane in.’
She had been examining one of the exhibits with great interest; a small furry

creature, very cuddly, like a teddy bear, except that its teeth would have snapped
off a man’s leg with one bite. Her curiosity was thoroughly piqued but she made



sure she didn’t stand too close, not because of the teeth, but because of the sensor
and the voice that she knew would be sent booming down the corridor. Having
given her considered opinion on their position she turned back to the exhibit.

‘Turned right?’ the Doctor said. ‘No, I don’t think so.’ ‘All these doors and
corridors are so alike,’ Barbara said hastily in an attempt to abort the incipient
argument.

‘Yes, indeed they are,’ the Doctor agreed, taking the way out she offered
him.

‘Is this your way of admitting you’re as lost as we are?’ Ian enquired
sweetly.

The Doctor considered for a moment and then, ‘I suppose it is,’ he said.
‘Let’s take Vicki’s advice. We can always retrace our steps.’

‘Can we? All right then, followme.’ And Ian, holding his purloined weapon
at the ready, set off down the corridor.

‘By the whole Morok Empire!’ Lobos bawled, smashing his fist down on
the desk in front of him, ‘How long is it supposed to take to round up a few
fugitives?’

‘How do we know they’re only a few?’ Ogrek, unlike the governor, was
not looking for excitement. He was a creature of dull habit and did not relish his
routine being disturbed.

‘I don’t care how many there are, I want them now!’ Lobos thundered.
‘And I say "a few" because howmany do you think could fit into that thing?’

He switched his screen to a picture of the TARDIS and then to a quick succession
of computer graphics. Having satisfied himself as to the dimensions of the
strange ship, he switched to a hologram and the image of the TARDIS stood
there before them. ‘You see? You see? Look at the size of it.’

Ogrek was not impressed. ‘They could be a whole colony,’ he said.
‘Maybe that’s why we haven’t discovered them. We’re looking for

something more or less our size and they could be no bigger than that.’ Ogrek
held up his hand, thumb and forefinger practically together.

‘Well we’ll soon know,’ Lobos said as a voice interrupted them.
‘213745 wishing to report, sir.’
‘Enter.’ Lobos turned to face the door as it slid open.
60213745 entered and saluted. ‘Well?’ Lobos barked. ‘Robot number

9284...’
‘His name is Matt,’ Lobos said.
The soldier frowned. ‘Matt?’
‘That’s right. His name is Matt. So forget the number, just tell me what he’s

come up with.’
The soldier gulped. ‘Nothing, sir.’
‘What?’
‘Nothing. He’s still working on it.’
Lobos cast a quick glance at Ogrek who immediately wiped the smile from

his face and found something very interesting to look at on the ceiling. But what
was happening at ground level was even more interesting for, far from being
annoyed, Lobos was highly delighted andOgrekwas quite startled when, hearing
what sounded suspiciously like a chuckle, he looked down again to find Lobos
grinning broadly. He raised a questioning eyebrow and Lobos burst into laughter.



‘He’s been beaten!’ he yelled. ‘Mau has finally met his match. He doesn’t
know the answers! Now I can’t wait to meet these aliens.’ He pointed a finger
at Ogrek. ‘So you take personal charge and get on with it.’

‘Yes, sir,’ Ogrek sighed - he only called the governor ‘sir’ when he felt put
upon - and, waving 213745 to go ahead of him, turned to leave.

213745 saluted smartly but Lobos didn’t even see it. He was once again
wrapped up in his video search.

‘If we keep going,’ Ian declared, a note of desperation in his voice, ‘We
must eventually come to an exit.’

‘Must we?’ Barbara said between clenched teeth.
‘Well, we got in, didn’t we? So we must be able to get out,’ Ian hissed back.
‘I’m not so sure. I think we’re going around in circles. We’ve been in this

corridor before, I know we have!’ There was more than a hint of desperation in
Barbara’s voice. Now a-note of hysteria was creeping in. ‘I never thought I’d
suffer from claustrophobia but I want to get out of this place!’

‘Easy, easy,’ the Doctor said soothingly in an attempt to lower the
temperature. ‘I too have the distinct impression that we’ve been here before but
it’s not a calamity. Oh, no. It’s helped me orientate myself. I know exactly where
we are.’

‘Do you?’ Ian snapped, waving the muzzle of his ray gun in all directions.
‘Which way then?’

The expression of happy confidence on the Doctor’s face disappeared. But
Vicki jumped to the rescue. ‘Straight ahead?’

‘Straight ahead,’ he agreed.
They moved warily down the corridor. Behind them the three Xerons

suddenly appeared from around a corner and quickly ducked back again.
‘They’re armed!’ Sita whispered.
‘I’ll see which way they go, then we’ll try to cut them off,’ Tor replied.
‘The one had a ray gun! I saw it!’
‘So? We were hoping they’d be armed, if you remember.’
‘That’s all very well, but how do you know they’re friendly? They could

shoot us on sight. They could be Morok allies!’
‘The Moroks wouldn’t be searching for them if they were allies.’
But Sita’s trepidation was not to be so easily assuaged. ‘They could still he

aggressive,’ he insisted, his courage really beginning to let him down. ‘And you
don’t know the Moroks are searching for them. We have to be cautious.’

‘We will be.’
‘How?’
‘We’ll make contact before we show ourselves.’ ‘How?’
‘Capture either the old one or the very young one. We can talk to them.

Then, if everything looks all right, let them introduce us to the others. Is it
agreed?’

‘Agreed!’ said Bo.
‘All right.’ Tor held up his hand for the others to hold back while he took

a quick look into the corridor.
‘They’ve gone to the left,’ he informed his companions, ‘We’ll cut through

the Triphid Section. Come on.’



Barbara hugged herself, not from cold, and shivered violently. ‘I hate to
admit it,’ she said, her voice trembling, ‘But I am scared, really scared. They
must have found the TARDIS by now; why has no-one come?’

‘I should think, by mere chance, we’ve been lucky enough to avoid them so
far,’ Ian suggested, ‘But I don’t reckon on our luck lasting too long. What I can’t
understand is why they don’t have a security system. You know, something like
automatic surveillance system in every room.’

There was no alarm on that case you took the gun from,’ Vicki pointed out.’
‘No, that’s right!’
‘The whole planet’s probably so secure maybe they feel they don’t need

one,’ Vicki continued. ‘Who’s going to steal anything from this place? They’ve
probably got a customs post at the point of departure. And just as you’re going
out through the green exit a voice behind you will say, "Excuse me, Earth people,
have you anything to declare?" And then you’ll have to say, "Yes, there’s this
ray gun I nicked. Watch out, it’s loaded!"’

Ian examined the weaponwith renewed interest, turning it over in his hands.
‘I never did find that out, did I?’ he said.

‘Well, for goodness sake, don’t try now!’ Barbara alrnost screeched in
sudden panic. ‘You could bring the whole place tumbling down around our ears.’

‘Like the walls of Jericho,’ Vicki said.
‘Well, if I have to try it out on a live target, and if it doesn’t work, it’ll be too

late, won’t it?’ Ian argued. ‘Can’t be helped. Even if it doesn’t bring the place
tumbling down, it could bring those... those people, whatever they are, down on
us.’

‘Like the hordes of Ghengis Khan,’ Vicki said.
‘Oh, shut up, Vicki! Shut up!’ Barbara slapped her hands over her ears and

closed her eyes screwing her eyelids up tight.
‘Sorry,’ Vicki said. She pulled down the corners of her mouth and turned

an ‘I didn’t mean anything by it’ face on Ian. Ian frowned in sympathetic
understanding and put an arm around Barbara.

‘Come on, Barbara...’ He gave her shoulders a little squeeze... ‘Don’t take
on now. We’ll be okay.’

Barbara opened her eyes, removed her hands from her ears, lowered her
shoulders, took a deep breath and nodded; even attempted a little smile.

‘Good.’ Ian smiled back, jerked his head forward, and they moved off once
more.

But the Doctor, unlike Barbara, wasn’t feeling in the least nervous. In fact
he was growing extremely bored with their aimless peripatetic wanderings and
was engrossed in an exhibit. Vicki joined him in passing, pausing to arch her
back and look sideways over her shoulder.

‘Oh!’ she exclaimed. ‘’That’s nice. Amodel of a flying saucer. Isn’t it good?
Such detail.’

‘That’s because it’s the real thing,’ the Doctor said. ‘What!’ Vicki stared
at him disbelievingly.

‘Oh, yes. Yes, it is,’ he insisted. ‘It’s not a model at all. It’s the real thing,
believe me.’

Vicki moved closer and the Doctor hurriedly gestured for her not to go too
close to the sensor. She tip-toed to the side of the cabinet.



‘But so small!’ She exclaimed. ‘Who could get into that?’ ‘Size is relative,
Vicki, like everything else. Just think of a microbe in a mastodon’s stomach.’

‘Mastodon?’
All right, elephant then.’
‘Doctor...’
‘Hmm?’ He looked up. Vicki indicated the imminent departure of Ian and

Barbara from the corridor and intimated they should follow.
‘All right, child, all right, I’m coming.’ He waved her on and, readjusting

the spectacles on his nose, returned to his study of the saucer. Vicki, taking him
at his word, turned and ran after the others. The Doctor wondered whether he
dare activate the sensor and learn more about the saucer. He was sorely tempted.
He dithered for a moment before deciding discretion was the better choice, and
backed away, pocketing his spectacles but still intrigued. A door behind him
opened, a hand across his mouth stifled his cry of alarm, and he was bundled
unceremoniously into the next room.

Tor cast a quick glance around the corridor to make sure they were
unobserved and then joined the others to find the Doctor lying, apparently
unconscious, on the floor.

‘What happened?’
‘I don’t know,’ Sita cried. ‘I hardly touched him. He just fell.’
‘Maybe he hit his head on the floor,’ Bo suggested, very worried. Tor turned

his attention from the Doctor to the other two and didn’t notice the Time Lord
open a crafty eye, trying to size up the situation. But, as his captors were standing
behind him, he could not see them without moving and he could not understand
what they were saying, so he closed his eye and feigned unconsciousness again.

‘All right,’ Tor said. ‘Sita, you stay here and watch him.’ ‘Me! Why. me?
Where are you going?’ Sita was thoroughly alarmed.

‘To try and find something to bring him around. Don’t worry, we won’t be
long. Come on, Bo.’

‘No, wait!’ Sita called, but it was too late. Nervously he regarded the
prostrate figure at his feet and looked anxiously around the silent room.

‘Well, he was following us!’ Barbara insisted.
‘I know that,’ Ian said. ‘But when did he stop? Didn’t either of you see or

hear anything?’
‘Oh, come on, Ian,’ Barbara objected, ‘you weren’t all that far in front.

Don’t try and put all the blame on us.’ ‘I’m not trying to put the blame on
anybody.’ ‘He was looking at a flying saucer,’ Vicki said. Barbara turned on her.
‘I’ve had just about enough of you, young lady. What with the walls of Jericho
and the hordes of Ghengis Khan and now flying saucers. How could a flying
saucer fit in here?’

‘Oh, you know all about flying saucers, do you?’ Vicki was highly
indignant. ‘How do you knowwhat sizes they come in? And there was that space
shuttle in here, wasn’t there? I even remember its name, The Robert E. Lee.
That’s not exactlyminute. Funny, I don’t recall a space shuttle named The Robert
E. Lee. Must have been after...’

‘All right, Vicki!’ Ian cut short Vicki’s loquaciousness. ‘He should have
missed us and caught up by now. Unless... Well, he could have taken a wrong
turning.’



‘I think he’s been captured,’ Vicki said.
‘Who by?’ Barbara asked. ‘And if you say King Kong I’ll scream.’
‘No. King Kong only went for girls,’ Ian chuckled. ‘He ate them.’
‘This isn’t a laughing matter, Ian,’ Barbara chided. ‘Sorry.’
‘This is a crisis. Which is the way into the glass cases? Standing here

discussing Hollywood movies? Or going back and finding the Doctor? Maybe
we should just try and take off in the The Robert E. Lee!’ she snorted.

‘We can’t keep worrying about that part of our future,’ Ian said.
‘If we don’t, there may not he any other part to worry about,’ was the reply.
‘Well, I say we go on,’ Ian said. ‘If the Doctor is lost he’ll take the specific

gravity of something or other, bisect an angle, measure the isosceles triangle,
compute a figure or two and be waiting for us at the front door when we get
there, wondering what took us so long.’ ‘All right,’ Barbara agreed.

‘Good. Let’s try this way.’ And, without waiting for a vote, Ian moved off.
Barbara stood for a moment and watched him go, followed by Vicki. Then

she too moved.



4 Capture

Tor and Bo moved swiftly back down the corridor towards the room in
which they had left Sita and the Doctor, Bo looking anxiously around and almost
tripping over himself in his anxiety. Tor nursed a small phial in his right hand.

At the door they stopped, looked around once more, and then slipped into
the room, Bo closing the door behind them. They stood just inside the door
staring down at the floor where Sita lay, motionless. There was no sign of the
Doctor.

‘Is he dead?’ Bo whispered. He was normally of a pallid complexion but
now he was a chalky-white and quite terrified. ‘Tor handed him the phial which
he took with trembling fingers; Tor knelt beside the stricken Sita and laid a hand
on his chest. After a few moments he shook his head and held his hand out for
the phial, broke the seal, and holding Sita’s mouth open, fed him the contents,
drop by drop. There was a second and then Sita groaned and opened his eyes,
staring straight at Tor. Another second and he sat bolt upright, let out a howl,
and clapped a hand to the back of his head.

‘What happened?’ Tor demanded to know.
Sita hung his head and thought. Then he looked up again at Tor. ‘I don’t

know,’ he said. ‘I turned my back for a second and then... and then... nothing.’
‘Nothing?’
‘I don’t remember anything.’
‘Was it the old man?’
‘I don’t know.’
‘Did he go out?’ Tor glanced towards the door and Bo couldn’t help turning

around and taking a look too.
‘I keep telling you!’ Sita let out another groan. ‘I didn’t see anything. I

didn’t hear anything. Everything just went black.’
Tor got to his feet and held out his hand to give Sita a lift. Sita pulled himself

up and stood swaying on legs that suddenly trembled. Tor held on to his arm.
‘Are you all right?’ he asked, concerned. Sita nodded. Tor turned to Bo:

‘He must have gone to join the others. Come on, we’ll see if we can find them.’
‘They’re still armed, remember!’ Sita said, massaging the back of his neck.

‘We’ll have to take our chance this time, otherwise the Moroks will get to them
first, if they haven’t already done so. Bo...’ Tor jerked his head to indicate the
door and Bo opened it, peeped out, then nodded the all clear to the other two
who quickly slipped out of the room behind him.

For a long while the room appeared to he deserted. Then a high-pitched,
metallic, electronic-sounding voice broke the silence, the voice of a Dalek: ‘I -
fooled - them - all. I - am - the - master.’ The voice was followed by an
unmistakable chuckle and the top of the Dalek casing was lifted to reveal the
self-satisfied smile of the Doctor.

‘Fooled them,’ he chuckled, ‘Fooled them. The last place anyone thinks of
looking is right under their noses.’ He climbed out of the casing, dusted himself
off and walked to the door, opened it, and stared straight into the muzzles of two
Morok guns.



‘Right under their noses,’ he said ironically.
‘Ian, it’s no good. I can’t go on. We’re going around in circles.’
Barbara puffed out her cheeks and blew out hard, took off her cardigan and

sat on the plinth of an exhibit, but screamed and leapt to her feet again as a voice
seemed to explode right behind her.

‘This is a model of a launch-pad for the battle cruiser type CB KRIS from
the planet Kylos...’

The voice cut off as they backed hurriedly away from the exhibit.
‘They don’t believe in wasting power,’ Vicki observed. ‘If you’re not

interested it just switches off.’ She looked around the gallery in which they found
themselves and heard her tummy rumble. ‘How long have we been in this place?’
she enquired peevishly. ‘I’m hungry.’

‘To be quite truthful, so am I,’ Ian admitted. ‘And I’ve no idea how long it’s
been. I’ve lost all track of time.’ ‘It must be night by now,’ Vicki complained.
‘If they have a night,’ Ian said.

‘Night or day, what difference does it make?’ Barbara snapped. ‘I don’t
even know if there is still some kind of world out there. I’m hot. I’m tired.’ And,
moving to the side of the plinth, she sat down again.

‘The Minotaur!’ Ian exclaimed.
‘What!’ Barbara leapt to her feet again.
‘Where?’ Vicki said, looking around in alarm.
‘So much for you and your encyclopaedic knowledge,’ Ian teased. ‘Don’t

you know your mythology? When Theseus entered the labyrinth he took with
him a ball of thread so he could use it to retrace his footsteps.’

‘Ian... We haven’t just entered the labyrinth,’ Barbara explained patiently,
‘We’ve been in it for hours and hours.’

But this didn’t seem to matter to Ian. ‘It’ll stop us going around in circles,
don’t you see?’ He held out his hand towards Barbara. ‘May I?’

‘May you what?’
‘Give us the sweater.’
Barbara hesitated, then handed it over. Ian took a handful of wool in each

hand and tried to pull the garment apart. Then he put a corner between his teeth
and gave it a three-cornered tug. Then he took it out of his mouth and looked at it.

‘How do you take this thing apart?’ he asked.
‘You’re not meant to,’ Barbara replied. ‘Unless you’re thinking of knitting

me a new one. Oh, give it here!’ She snatched it back. ‘And you could at least
ask. It’s one of my best cardigans.’

‘I did ask. I said, may I?’
‘Give me your penknife.’
‘Here.’ Ian dug his hand into a pocket and, producing the knife, opened it

and passed it to her. She ripped the hem and started to unpick the wool, passing
the end to Ian. He tied it around the gantry that was part of the model launch-pad.

‘But if we leave a trail of wool,’ Vicki objected, ‘someone could see it and
follow us, and we’ll be caught.’

‘If we can’t find our way out of here - and soon - we’re going to be caught
anyway,’ came back the reply.

‘Maybe we’ll find our way to the canteen,’ Vicki ventured. ‘If we starve to
death it won’t matter whether we’re found or not.’



The Doctor was bundled into what he presumed to be a cell, cylindrical
in shape and, like all the other rooms in the building, devoid of any apparent
light source or means of ventilation. Not only that but, had he not been outside
one second, and in the next, and seen the door close behind him, he would have
thought he was there through some conjuring trick and that the room was
hermetically sealed. There was simply no way of teiling which panel was wall
and which was door. It was like being imprisoned in a tin can, except for the fact
that, wherever it was coming from, there was light.

The only furnishing in the cell was a fairly ordinary looking chair with arms,
set on an estrade and facing away from him. He walked around to look at it from
the other side, then turned his attention to the walls, running his fingers across
the panels. But, as this got him absolutely nowhere, he gave up, sat in the chair
and decided to let events take their course.

He was too restless to remain seated for long and, after a few moments of
drumming his fingertips together, he decided to inspect the walls once more. It
was only when he attempted to rise that he realised he was firmly trapped. Some
kind of force field held him securely to the chair. It was at this point that a panel
facing the chair slid back to reveal a smiling Lobos seated at his desk.

‘Welcome to Xeros,’ he said.
‘I beg your pardon?’ the Doctor replied, not understanding.
‘Welcome to Xeros,’ Lobos repeated, in English. ‘How did you do that?’

the Doctor asked with no little surprise.
‘Do what?’ Lobos looked around, unsure as to what the Doctor was

referring to.
‘Switch languages so quickly,’ the Doctor explained.
‘I haven’t,’ Lobos replied. ‘This did.’ He fingered a small, glowing, button-

like object just below his collar. ‘I am still speaking my own language and you
are still speaking yours but we can understand each other through instantaneous
translation. All it required was for you to say a few words and you hear me in...
what is it by the way?’

‘English.’
‘Ah, English...’ Ile glanced at the video screen beside him and, after a couple

of seconds, continued: ‘That is an Earth language, yes?’
The Doctor nodded.
‘So now we know which system and which planet you come from. And I

will hear you in Morok. And now you know which planet I come from.’
‘Amazing!’ the Doctor said. ‘Truly amazing! Instant dubbing.’ His

admiration for this piece of Morok technology was patently obvious.
‘Simple really,’ Lobos said with false modesty. ‘It translates a hundred

thousand modes of audio communication and is kept constantly updated,
language being a living thing and constantly changing.’

‘Of course,’ the Doctor agreed. ‘New slang, new expressions, new
technological terms, et cetera. Knowledge, like the universe, is forever
expanding and language has to keep up with it.’

‘Unfortunately, it is lacking in quite a few thousand more which have not
been fed into it, and I doubt that they ever will be. The Moroks seem to have
lost their desire for expansion.’ Lobos sat for a moment staring into space and
regretting the Empire had no more use for such as he. Then he pulled himself



together, looked curiously at the Doctor, and smiled again. ‘So, welcome to
Xeros, the smallest planet in the Morok Empire. What is your name?’

There was no answer.
‘Very well. Mine is Lobos and I am Governor of this planet.’
‘Curator of the Museum would seem a better title.’
Lobos nodded. ‘Yes, Xeros is a museum, a lasting memorial to the

achievements of the Morok civilisation.’
‘Really? From my observations it seems to be arousing very little interest.’
Lobos shrugged. ‘People tire of their heritage. Once sightseers filled this

place, marvelling at what they saw. Now?Well, the occasional ship fromMorok
calls...’ He shrugged again.

‘Perhaps if you reduced the price of admission,’ the Doctor smiled.
‘So, you have a sense of humour. You don’t by any chance play chess do

you?’
‘I’ve been known to,’ the Doctor said.
‘Well?’
‘Try me.’
‘I might very well do that... if we have time. Though, be warned, I learned

my chess from a master.’
‘So did I,’ the Doctor replied. ‘Several in fact.’
Lobos decided to change the subject. ‘Tell me about your ship.’
The Doctor gazed around the room.
‘Perhaps its inclusion in our museum might bring the visitors flocking

back,’ Lobos suggested. ‘It must be something of a rarity. If we were fortunate
enough to be able to include the crew, that would be novel.’

‘Grotesque, I’d call it.’ The Doctor said. ‘When they will not give a doit to
relieve a lame beggar, they will lay out ten to see a dead Indian.’

‘I beg your pardon?’
‘Quoting - from another master,’ the Time Lord said.
Lobos got up from behind his desk and paced the floor, hands clasped

behind his back. ‘No,’ he said. ‘I’m afraid admission charges have nothing to do
with the lack of interest. Our civilisation rests on its laurels’ - now where had he
picked up that expression? ‘Galactic conquest is a thing of the past. Life now,
it is said, is purely to enjoy.’

‘The decline and fall of the Roman Empire. Yes, it has happened before in
galaxies far beyond your reach.’

Lobos looked suddenly interested. ‘Tell me about it.’
‘What?’
‘This Empire.’ He waved his hand in a circular motion, trying to recall the

name.
‘Rome?’ the Doctor prompted.
‘Rome.’
‘What’s to tell?’ the Doctor asked. ‘History repeats itself, that’s all.’
Lobos reseated himself and leaned forward on the desk. ‘No, I want to

know,’ he insisted. ‘What happened to it? This Empire.’
‘It grew, it conquered, it fed on - and off - those it conquered. It got too

big for its boots.’



Lobos laughed. ‘Too big for its boots! I like that. Too big for its boots!’
And he chuckled merrily. The Doctor raised an eyebrow.

‘Yes,’ he said, "Rather like your - what did you call it? - Morok? Rather
like your ‘’Torok Empire I would think. Then it declined and fell.’

Lobos stopped laughing. ‘How?’ he asked.
‘Well, now,’ the Doctor placed his fingertips together. ‘That, as they say,

is the sixty-four thousand dollar question, isn’t it? And there were probably as
many reasons as there were dollars. Am I going to sit here in this chair for the
next twenty-four hours giving you a potted history of the Roman Empire?’

‘If I feel like it,’ Lobos said.
This time the Doctor raised both eyebrows. ‘Well, let’s see if we can’t put

it in a nutshell, keep it to the kernel as it were. There was a revolt by slaves led
by one Spartacus.’

‘What!’ Lobos stiffened.
‘But that was crushed.’
Lobos relaxed.
‘There was trouble in the colonies.’
‘There always is,’ Lobos said.
‘Political backstabbing.’
‘Ah, yes,’ Lobos said, thinking of his own exile. ‘There’s always that too.’
‘Dissention, schism, uprising, rebellion. Finally Rome herself was invaded.

There are some who attribute the whole thing to lead poisoning sending them
all mad. The Romans were great engineers. They built a water system with
marvellous aqueducts of which, I am sure, they were inordinately proud. But,
unfortunately, the channels were lined with lead. I suppose it could have been
something as simply as that, but it seems to be the way of all empires: sooner or
later the conquerer is conquered.’

Lobos sat for a while, thinking, then: ‘So why did you come here?’ he
eventually asked.

‘Exploration,’ was the simple reply.
‘Ah, a scientist! Good. It makes a change to have someone intelligent to

talk to. And you have come from this... Earth?’
‘Why do you ask?’
‘You don’t want to answer? Very well, let’s try another question. Where

are your companions?’
The Doctor chuckled to himself. Lobos watched him for a second or two

then leaned forward and touched a switch on the console in front of him.
‘You will tell me,’ he said. ‘I can get all the information I want without the

need of resorting to brute force. Your co-operation is not essential. Now, where
are your companions?’ Lobos’s shoulders suddenly jerked forward and he let
out a little gasp as he grimaced in pain. He placed a hand over his stomach.

‘Indigestion?’ the Doctor enquired kindly. ‘I remember I had it once,
heartburn you know, like a knife between the shoulder blades. I think it was a
mixture of goat cheese and olives that did it. Galen recommended the rind of a
lemon as being of great benefit to a delicate constitution.’

‘Galen? What is Galen?’
‘An Ancient Greek physician. Oh, yes, the lemon...’



‘I do not know this Ancient Greek or his lemon!’ Lobos sounded quite put
out. He was growing increasingly annoyed with this scientist who seemed to be
playing games with him and was having second thoughts about the chess. To be
beaten by a Morok robot was one thing. To be beaten by this scruffy-looking
Earth creature was quite another. He hastily slipped a capsule into his mouth.
And what was this heartburn to which he referred? It sounded extremely nasty,
particularly for a Morok with two hearts.

‘What’s this?’ Bo asked, kneeling down and tracingwith his fingers a length
of woollen thread.

‘They’re leaving a trail,’ Tor said.
‘Why?’
Tor looked at Bo and wished the youngster wouldn’t believe he had all the

answers. ‘They must have missed the old one,’ he said. ‘Yes, this was put there
for him to follow them.’

‘No, I don’t think so,’ Sita’disagreed. ‘They would have come back to look
for him, surely.’

But Tor was in no mood to be contradicted. ‘Well, whatever the reason,’ he
snapped, ‘it’s a trail and trails are meant to be followed. So let’s follow it.’

‘I ask you again,’ Lobos said. ‘Where are your companions?’
Again the Doctor refused to answer. Lobos turned away and looked at the

screen. Then he flicked an intercom switch and, smiling at the Doctor - the
capsule had obviously gone to work on the pain - said, ‘Commander B Division.’

A disembodied voice immediately answered him: ‘B Division commander,
sir.’

‘Proceed immediately to Corridor 417. Detain three Earth creatures: one
male, one female, one young female.’

‘Message received. It will be dealt with imrediately.’
‘You look surprised,’ Lobos said. ‘I told you there was no need for brute

force. Unless, of course, I feel like it,’ he added threateningly. ‘Look.’ He
swivelled the screen into a position where the Doctor could see it. On the screen
was an image of Ian and the girls in the corridor that contained the flying saucer.
‘A simple matter of thought selection,’ Lobos went on. ‘By asking a question I
plant an image in your mind. No matter what you might say, so long as you are in
that chair, I will see your mental pictures reflected here.’ He tapped the screen.
‘So, you see, it is quite useless for you to lie. Shall we return to the questioning?
How did you get here?’

The image of a penny-farthing cycle appeared on the screen. Lobos
frowned. The Doctor smiled at the governor’s reaction. He was beginning to
enjoy the situation.

Ian played out the last few inches of wool. ‘Well... that’s it.
‘It didn’t work, did it?’ Barbara said.
‘At least we didn’t go around in circles or backtrack.’
‘Why don’t they put up signs like they do in ordinary museums?’ Vicki

sighed.
‘Maybe the Doctor is wrong,’ Barbara said. ‘Maybe you can’t change the

future.’
‘Don’t say that, Barbara!’ Vicki cried. ‘I don’t even want to think of such

an awful thing happening.’



Ian dropped the wool and moved away, disappearing around a corner.
Barbara shook her head and took Vicki’s hands. ‘I don’t want it to happen either,
of course I don’t! But we can’t just walk about for ever hoping we won’t be
discovered. We’ve got to do something positive. And where is the Doctor?’ She
looked around as though almost expecting him to appear, breezily unconcerned.
Instead it was Ian who returned, smiling broadly.

‘So it didn’t work, hey?’ He crooked his index finger, indicating they should
follow him, ‘Come and see what I’ve found.’

Vicki and Barbara followed him around the corner and there, ahead of them,
lay the outside doors.

‘What is it like, this planet, Earth?’ Lobos asked.
A series of images appeared on the screen: a colony of seals congregated on

a rocky outcrop, diving into the choppy sea, cavorting about; penguins, strutting
about, flapping their wings, nature’s natural clowns; the wild black and white
wastes of Antarctica with eddies of snow being blown across the ice; a close-up
of a walrus, all tusks and bristling moustachios; and finally back to the seals.

‘What are these creatures?’ Lobos asked.
‘Friends of mine,’ the Doctor assured him, still smiling. ‘But these are

aquatic creatures! You are not an aquatic creature.’
‘Oh, am I not?’ The images were replaced by a picture of the Doctor posing

magnificently in Edwardian striped bathing costume and boater. The Doctor
chuckled. Not a bad pair of legs, he thought.

‘So...’ Lobos growled. ‘You still see fit to play games with me. Well then, I
don’t have any more use for you and we have a saying on Morok, he who laughs
last laughs longest...’

‘Funny,’ the Doctor said, ‘they have that saying on Earth too.’
‘Very funny, particularly as it is I who have the last laugh.’ He pressed a

button on his desk, the doors behind him slid open and two soldiers entered,
saluting smartly. ‘Take him to the preparation room,’ Lobos commanded.

‘Great!’ Ian exclaimed. ‘We’ve found the way out, now how do we get
out?’ They stared helplessly at the huge doors unable to discern any means of
opening them.

‘Open sesame!’ Ian said with irritable frustration. ‘This is becoming more
and more nightmarish. We don’t know which way to turn. Every way seems the
wrong way. We don’t know what’s out there anyway.’

‘Choice is only possible when you have at least some facts to go on,’
Barbara said. ‘We don’t seem to have any.’

‘Yes,’ Ian agreed, still searching around the door for some indication of its
mechanism. ‘They say to be forewarned is to be forearmed. Well, we’ve been
forewarned and all it’s done is to leave us totally and utterly confused.’

‘Totally is enough,’ Barbara said. ‘Utterly is irrelevant. And someone is
coming. I suggest we make ourselves immediately, totally, and utterly invisible.’
She was already moving to one side and the three of them dived for cover behind
a conveniently placed and suitably large enough exhibit.

They were just in time. There was the steady tramp of marching feet and
Lobos appeared at the head of a squad of soldiers. The doors opened in front of
them, they marched out, and the doors started to close again. Ian waited until
almost the last second then darted out and, before the doors finally came together,



jammed his penknife between them, creating a chink just wide enough to see
through. Barbara and Vicki left their hiding place to join him.

‘What’s happening?’ Vicki asked. And, before Ian could reply, had slipped
in front of him and, crouching, applied her own eye lower down the crack. ‘Oh,
no!’ she groaned. ‘They’ve got the TARDIS!Oh, Ian, we’ll never get away now!’

Lobos stood staring at the TARDIS as though he were challenging this
strange, silent, unknown object to give up its secrets. He walked up to it, touched
it, walked around it, viewing it from every angle. He had already had its exterior
dimensions graphically illustrated for him on the scanner but it was another thing
to actually stand there and look at it.

‘Huh!’ He finally grunted. ‘That is the strangest looking craft I have ever
seen. I could fly to Morok flapping my arms quicker than that could get off the
ground.’

The soldiers dutifully laughed. Lobos viewed the TARDIS from another
angle. ‘It must be very cramped and uncomfortable for four travellers inside at
one time,’ he observed. ‘Oh, by the way,’ he turned to the officer beside him,
‘these travellers come from a planet called Earth.’

The soldiers, imagining this to be another example of their leader’s wit,
burst out laughing again but Lobos stilled them with a look. Then he turned back
and regarded the officer, a giant creature who towered over hirn. Lobos noted
he had only one eye and a deep scar that ran from his forehead to his chin. ‘The
language they speak,’ he went on, ‘is one called English. How it got into the
memory banks I have no idea considering that is an area we have never explored.
But, I suppose, anomolies arise in every system.’

‘I seem to remember,’ the officer said, ‘at one time there was some talk of
an invasion and a number of Earth languages were processed, but nothing came
of it. Maybe they were left in by mistake. You know what civil servants are,
clutter clutter clutter.’ And the officer sniggered. Lobos turned his attention back
to the TARDIS and the officer anticipated his next question. ‘We were unable
to gain entry, sir.’

‘Oh, dear!’ Lobos said with undisguised sarcasm. ‘Didn’t they leave you
the key then? Force it, you fool!’

The officer swung around and bellowed at the nearest soldier. ‘You!’ The
man leapt to attention and saluted. ‘What happened to that equipment I called
for?’

The man started to stutter his protest that he had never heard any order
for any equipment but the officer yelled even louder to shut him up. ‘I’m not
interested in excuses!’ he bawled. ‘I’ll deal with you later. Get it!’

‘Yes, sir.’ The soldier saluted again, did a smart about-face and, not too
sure of what he was going to look for, or where, marched off. The officer turned
to Lobos.

‘Incompetent idiots,’ he snorted disdainfully.
Lobos was not impressed. ‘You’re not a Morok,’ he said, ‘Where are you

from?’
‘My name is Mort, sir. I am a mercenary from Kreme.’
‘Humph!’ Lobos turned his back. He might have known. He had no time

for soldiers of fortune. Give him a professional every time.



‘What are they doing?’ Barbara whispered, the only one of the three unable
to see.

‘"I’hey just seem to be standing around,’ Vicki replied. ‘Looking at the
TARDIS.’

‘Let’s hope they don’t do any damage,’ Barbara wished fervently.
‘There’s not much they can do,’ Ian assured her. ‘Unless they get inside.’
‘Do you suppose they’re going to bring it in here?’ Vicki asked.
‘I would think so, eventually.’ Ian glanced at Barbara.
‘Well, what next? Find the Doctor, I suppose.’
‘Maybe one of us should stay here and keep an eye on the TARDIS,’ Vicki

suggested. ‘If we have to leave in a hurry we don’t want to waste time having
to look for it.’

‘We know where it’s going. We saw it before, remember?’ Ian re-applied
his eye to the crack.

‘And could you find your way back there?’ Vicki said.
Ian glanced down at the top of her head. ‘In which case we’d all have to

stay here and watch it.’ And he went back to his spying.
‘Stay as you are! Don’t move!’ The voice echoed down the gallery. They

stiffened. Ian was the first to turn around to see a Morok guard standing a few
feet away, his gun levelled at them. Vicki got up from her crouched position and
slowly she and Barbara turned to face the soldier. For a long moment no-one
moved, then Ian took a step forward, but Barbara laid a restraining hand on his
arm, never taking her eyes off the Morok.

‘Don’t, Ian. He’ll fire that thing.’
Ian turned his head slightly towards her though he too kept a heady eye on

their captor.
‘Well, wouldn’t that change the shape of things to come?’ he whispered.
‘It certainly would,’ she replied. ‘There’d be only three of us in those cases

instead of four.’
The guard frowned, waved his gun about, and ordered them to move away

from the door slowly. Barbara and Vicki started to comply but now it was Ian
who stretched out a restraining arm. ‘No, wait a minute,’ he whispered. Then,
turning his back on the guard, went on: ‘From what we heard outside, these guys
seem to work pretty much by the book. I doubt the word "initiative" figures
prominently in their vocabulary. Why don’t we call his bluff?’

‘Because he’s not bluffing, that’s why!’ Barbara hissed. ‘Are you out of
your mind?’

‘That’s enough talking!’ The guard barked. ‘I said, move out.’
Ian turned back to him, smiling. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘we heard you the first time.

But what if we don’t feel like it?’
The guard’s frown deepened. This was hardly the reaction he had expected.

Ian noted his irresolution with some satisfaction and started to move quite
casually towards him.

‘Don’t go too far, Ian!’ Barbara warned, seeing in her mind’s eye the vision
of what that ray gun could do. But Ian still continued his advance.

‘Yes,’ the guard said, ‘She’s right. Now move back. Move back!’ But it
was he, showing increasing signs of nervousness, who took a step backwards.



‘There was nothing in your orders about killing us, was there?’ Ian said
softly. The guard retreated. ‘Well, was there? Why don’t you answer me? Was
there?’ His eyes never left the Morok’s face.

‘No, no, there wasn’t.’ He ran his tongue across his upper lip. ‘But that
doesn’t mean to say I won’t if I have to.’

‘But you don’t have to. What do you think your superiors would say if you
killed us?’ Ian’s voice was now so low it was almost as though he were trying
to soothe a bewildered child. ‘ "Have you brought in the prisoners?" they’d ask.
And you’d have to say, "No, I went and shot them all."’ Ian tut-tutted and shook
his head, half-turned away as if to say something to the others, then swiftly swung
back and, knocking the guard’s arm to one side, grappled with him, yelling to
Barbara and Vicki: ‘Run! Get out of it! Both of you!’

But the two stood stockstill, taken as much by surprise as the guard and
seemingly rooted to the spot. Ian was now struggling desperately, holding the
man’s wrist so that the muzzle of the gun pointed anywhere but at a living target.
The panic-stricken guard fought back fiercely. He now had an excuse to kill. He
could always claim he was attacked when the aliens resisted arrest.

‘Will you... get... out of here?’ Ian yelled to Barbara and Vicki, between
gasps, as the Morok swung him around, almost knocking him off balance. But
Ian kept his grip on the man’s wrist, trying to regain the initiative by forcing
him back over a cabinet and holding him there. Had he not been armed he could
have tried for a knock-out punch but, as it was, wrestling seemed the better bet.
But the Morok was stronger than he looked and already Ian could feel himself
weakening, painfully dragging air into his lungs, his legs beginning to feel like
rubber and the muscles in his arms aching with fatigue.

Still Vicki and Barbara did not move.
It was only when the doors behind him slid open to reveal Lobos and his

guards that they were suddenly galvanised into action and took to their heels,
disappearing in opposite directions like rabbits down their respective boltholes.

‘Get them!’ Lobos yelled and the guards streamed into the building. Ian
broke free from his opponent. But too late. He was immediately jumped by a
couple more. A quick, hard, jab to the stomach knocked the remaining breath
from his body and two pairs of hands took a firm grip of his arms. In a way he
was rather glad to have someone else take the weight off his feet. Lobos glared
at him.

‘Take him to my quarters,’ he snapped, and watched as the guards dragged
Ian out of the building, passedMort who was standing there watching too. ‘Well,
mercenary?’ Lobos said, ‘Do you think you’re up to flushing out a couple of
women? Or are you just going to stand there looking pretty?’

By the time they had got out of the building and moved a short distance
away Ian was beginning to recover and thinking of escape. Struggling, he
decided, would appear to be a useless exercise so, that being the case, why not
try the opposite? He let out a deep sigh and went limp in his captor’s hands.
The two soldiers checked their stride to adjust to this sudden increase in weight
and, taking advantage of the momentary distraction, Ian rammed his elbow into
the first soldier’s stomach. The winded Morok gasped and reeled away and Ian
swung a perfect uppercut that connected with the second guard’s chin. As the
man catapulted backwards Ian let out a howl of pain and clutched his bruised



knuckles. Surely he had broken every bone in his hand. The pain almost
paralysed his arm.

Still moaning, he crouched over his injury and turned just in time to see the
butt of a ray gun descending. Evading the intended blow, he straightened up, and
there was a mutual howl as the top of his head connected with a Morok nose.
As the dark red, almost black blood spurted over the white uniform, Ian turned
and ran for his life.

Barbara stopped running and flopped against a wall, holding her ribs and
gasping for breath. She looked back along the empty corridor through which she
had just run. Which way now? From one corridor to another? From one room to
another?While, all the time, theywere closing in and ultimately shewas trapped?
It was hopeless.

Then she noticed an insignificant looking door in the wall opposite. With
another glance down the corridor she moved across to it. On the wall was a touch
control. She placed her finger on it and the door slid open. Beyond it she could
discern what looked like a small storage room in which were stacked various
containers. The layer of dust on the one nearest the door gave some indication
of the infrequency of the room’s use. Maybe it was the museum’s equivalent of
a broom closet.

The door was beginning to close and Barbara touched the control oncemore
and slipped inside. A couple of seconds elapsed and the door closed silently
behind her. She was in pitch blackness. She heard the approach of heavy
footsteps and felt her way by memory and touch to one of the largest containers,
groped her way around it, and crouched down. It was just as well, she thought,
that her pursuers had such a slow turn of speed. She remembered the stiffness
of their movements and pictured them now, moving up the corridor towards her
hiding place.

The door opened and a shaft of light cut through the darkness and spread
like a white runner on the floor embossed with the elongated shadow of one of
the guards. It seemed to stay there for an eternity. Then it moved further into the
room, the upper part of the body sliding like a shadow puppet half way up the
far wall. The head moved, first to one side, then the other. Then it backed out,
the door closed, the light was gone.

It was only then that Barbara realised she had been holding her breath and
released the air from her lungs. She waited a while before leaving her hiding
place and creeping slowly back to the door. She listened carefully, making sure
all was clear, then started to feel around the door, slowly at first and then with
movements growing more and more panicky. The horror of her situation sank
in. There was no means of opening the door from the inside. She was locked in:
locked in a room of total silence and impenetrable darkness.

She sank to the floor and leaned back against the door. I could die in here,
she thought. In a thousand years’ time someone will open the door and find my
mummified body covered in cobwebs and dust. I wonder if they have spiders
on this planet? She shuddered at the thought and drew her knees up to her chin,
hugging her legs. No, she thought, they won’t discover a mummy at all. After
all, I’ve got to get out of here, to get into a glass case. Perverse though it was,
there was some comfort in that thought.



Vicki sat back and let out a long sigh of satisfaction. She inspected the
tupperware-type utensil in front of her, still containing a few drops of a dirty
dark-green substance - and burped. ‘Oh, pardon me!’ She giggled and looked
around at a dozen faces regarding her solemnly. She smiled an embarrassed
smile.

‘Have you had enough?’ Tor asked.
‘Yes, thank you,’ Vicki nodded. ‘It was delicious, despite its... even though

it didn’t really look very appetising. But it was very nice. Thank you. A bit like
sweet and sour sauce really, with a sort of nutmeggy aftertaste.’ She realised they
had absolutely no idea what she was talking about. ‘What was it?’ she asked.

‘It’s called phosyn and it’s manufactured in the laboratory. I don’t know
how.’ Tor seated himself opposite her.

‘I could manage a little more,’ Vicki said hopefully. Tor shook his head.
‘I’m sorry, but that’s all we have.

You’ve just eaten a Xeron’s rations for three days.’
‘Or, if you want to look at it another way,’ Bo said, ‘a day’s rations for

three Xerons.’
‘Oh, I’m sorry!’ Vicki apologised, feeling very badly about it. ‘Whose

rations did I eat?’
‘It doesn’t matter,’ Tor shrugged. ‘They were happy to volunteer it.’
Bo gave Tor a sideways glance. He didn’t look too happy.
‘What else do you get?’ Vicki asked brightly.
‘What else?’ Tor looked distinctly puzzled.
‘Yes, to eat.’
‘That’s it,’ Tor said, pointing to the tupperware. ‘That’s all!’
‘What else do we need?’
‘What a boring diet.’
‘It contains the right amount of everything we need,’ Sita joined the

conversation. ‘Nutrients, minerals, vitamins, trace elements, everything.’
‘And I wonder what more besides,’ Vicki said suspiciously.
‘How do you mean?’ Tor asked. Vicki shrugged.
‘Something to keep us quiet, you mean,’ Dako said. It was the first time he

had spoken but Vicki had noticed him before any of the others. He was, in human
terms, extremely handsome with a lean face and pale grey eyes that seemed to
look right through her. She felt herself blushing and turned quickly back to Tor.

‘I suppose, now you feel better, we had better introduce ourselves,’ he
suggested, but before he could go on, another voice cut in.

‘I am Dako,’ it said.
Vicki knew who the voice belonged to and that she would have to return

her attention to him, even though it would intensify her blush, but not to do so
would be rude.

‘How... II-how d-d-do you do? she stammered. Dako frowned, being unable
to fathom the meaning behind this seemingly fathomless remark.

‘Dako is the leader of the out-workers,’ Tor continued, his voice carrying
an indirect reproof. ‘He shouldn’t be in here. It is forbidden. If he is found...’

‘Found?’ Vicki asked. ‘By who?’
‘The Moroks.’
‘Oh! You mean, the others? The ones in the white uniforms?’



‘That’s right.’ Tor nodded.
‘I won’t be found,’ Dako protested with a hint of the gasconade about him.

‘They never come down here.’ ‘Why not?’ Vicki asked.
‘They wouldn’t dare,’ Dako replied. ‘Too much chance of being

ambushed.’ And he opened his jacket to reveal the butt of a ray gun protruding
from his waistband. He closed the jacket again quickly.

‘Where are we exactly?’ Vicki asked, turning back to Tor.
‘In the vaults of the main building, the old part that is never used.’
‘That’s why the Moroks won’t come down here,’ Dako interrupted again.

‘They don’t know this area. We know every room, every passage, ways to get
in and was to get out. We know every inch of it.’

Vicki nodded then looked quickly towards the door as one of the Xerons
standing guard opened it to admit another of their number. Tor stood up. ‘Gyar!
What news?’

‘The man has been captured. There is no sign of the woman.’ Gyar was tall,
at least six feet two, with a lean frame, fair hair and green eyes, and a gentle
manner. He looked down at Vicki. ‘I’m sorry,’ he said.

‘Don’t worry, Vicki,’ Dako said, heading for the door. ‘I’ll find her.’
‘No!’ Tor shouted. ‘You’re not even supposed to be in here. Let someone

else go.’
‘I will find her,’ Dako said, and slipped out of the room.
‘He what!’ Lobos roared, glaring at the soldier who stood stiffly before him,

his glassy eyes unfocused and his mind racing, trying to dredge up some kind of
excuse however feeble. But not even the feeblest excuse would come to mind.
Both his hearts were heating so fast it was almost as if they were racing each
other. Any moment now and he was going to hyper-ventilate.

Lobos turned to look at Ogrek who was regarding the soldier with no
particular interest, rather like someone in a supermarket idly wondering whether
to purchase a name brand or the generic variety of a packet of frozen peas. At
the sight of Ogrek’s bland expression, Lobos’s rage increased and he exploded
like a string of firecrackers.

‘Am I surrounded by incompetent idiots?’ he screamed and felt a stab of
pain that had him reaching for his capsules with one hand while, with the other,
he pressed the button on his desk. The door opened. The guards entered. ‘This
man is under arrest,’ Lobos bawled. The guards disarmed the hapless soldier and
marched him out. Lobos slipped the capsule into his mouth and slumped in his
chair. Ogrek found something interesting to look at on the ceiling.

Ian flattened himself against the back of the police box and wondered what
to do next. After a moment he moved to one side and peeped cautiously around
the corner. A guard was standing in front of the TARDIS, his back to Ian, his
ray gun loosened in its holster.

Ian tried to judge the distance between them.He could run andmake a flying
tackle - would probably be able to bring the guard down before he could draw his
gun. But then there would be a struggle. The lack of oxygen in the atmosphere
was beginning to affect him again and he knew he had to act quickly and without
much effort. Soon he would he so weak it would take only the proverbial feather
to knock him down.



Distraction, he thought. He had to bring the guard closer to the time-
machine and jump him as effortlessly as possible. He looked down at his feet
and then, squatting, sifted through the sand, eventually coming up with a handful
of small stones. It wasn’t for nothing he had been a Western fan as a child. He
straightened up, backed away from the TARDIS to give himself elbow room,
and lobbed a stone over the top of the box, followed by another, and another in
quick succession. Then he slipped, in the opposite direction, around to the front.

The ruse had worked. The guard had moved close to the TARDIS and was
looking in the direction from which he had heard the rattle of stones. Fortunately
for Ian he was curious but not unduly alarmed and hadn’t even bothered to draw
his gun. When he eventually turned around again it was to find it pointing at
his face and his hand reaching for an empty holster. His jaw dropped and his
eyes opened wide. Ian could have no idea what thoughts were racing through the
man’s head but he was obviously terrified. Ian, however, was taking no chances.

‘Don’t do anything stupid,’ he warned.
‘Don’t kill me! Please don’t kill me!’ The man whined.
Obviously, Ian thought, a tour of duty on this planet was looked on as

something of a doddle, totally devoid of danger. Anything out of the ordinary
and these men were all at sixes and sevens.

‘Well, that rather depends on you,’ he replied, ‘I have some questions I need
answering.’

‘If I can, I will,’ the guard squealed. ‘I promise!’
Good grief! Ian thought, his dialogue’s worse than mine. I’m in a western

and he’s in a soap opera! He frowned at these ridiculous random thoughts: the
lack of oxygen must be affecting his brain. He’d better get it over with, and fast.
The guard mistook the nature of the frown and grew even more panicky.

‘One of my friends - the old man - has been captured. What’s happened to
him?’ Ian continued.

The guard stared at him or, rather, at the muzzle of the gun. Ian grabbed him
by the collar and jammed the gun under his chin. Suddenly the man was talking
gibberish, or so Ian thought. He kept pointing to his collar and now, under Ian’s
pressure, he was jammed up against the TARDIS. Ian wondered if he had gone
off his head or whether he was choking him. He let go of the collar and the man
immediately reverted to English. Or so Ian thought.

‘I don’t know! I don’t know!’
‘Is he dead?’
‘No... no...’
That hesitation was enough to indicate that he did know. Ian jammed the

gun harder into the man’s throat. ‘Then where is he?’
‘The preparation room,’ he gurgled. ‘He’s been taken to the preparation

room. It’s nothing to do with me. I’m just a simple soldier doing my duty. I
obey...’

‘What happens there?’ Ian grabbed the collar again. ‘Ti ygrok ga dis brajic,’
the man’said.

‘I said, what happens?’ Ian let go of the collar.
‘And I just told you, he’ll be got ready for the museum.’ ‘Take me there.’



The guard’s eyes looked as though they were about to pop out of his head.
His mouth was as dry as the sand at his feet and he could hardly speak. ‘You’ll
be killed,’ he whispered. ‘We’ll both be killed!’

‘Take me there.’ Ian jabbed the muzzle in even harder. The guard gulped
and nodded: ‘I’ll take you... I’ll take you.’

‘We’ll smoke them out,’ Lobos said finally.
Ogrek regarded his superior, still slumped in his chair, and wondered, if

the governor cracked, would he be required to take over? By the great Ork he
hoped not.

‘Smoked out,’ he said, as though he knew what Lobos was talking about.
‘I want everybody out of the buildings,’ Lobos said. ‘Now.’
‘They might not be in the buildings.’
‘Who?’
‘The fugitives.’
‘Don’t argue! Just order everyMorok and everyXeron out of the buildings!’

He wondered how many capsules he could take before he O.D.’d.
‘And then?’ Ogrek’s voice grated on Lobos’s nerves. Did the man never

use any other tone?
‘Then we’ll use Zaphra Gas. If they don’t come out we will go in and find

them, paralyzed and no longer able to avoid capture.’
Ogrek stuck his tongue in his cheek and nodded. ‘Their power of

locomotion is truly amazing,’ he said. ‘I’ve not seen bipeds capable of that turn
of speed. They must be extremely primitive.’

Lobos rose and moved around to the front of the desk to face Ogrek, almost
nose to nose. ‘Those primitives have made fools of us. And, if the gas doesn’t
do the trick, I don’t care what we do with them. Shoot them on sight.’

‘Those are your orders?’
Lobos nodded.
‘Good.’ Ogrek strolled towards the door, ‘It will get it all over with that

much quicker.’ He turned back. ‘And I do like clean endings.’ He smiled and
was gone.

Lobos stared at the door for a moment and then turned and reached for his
capsules, changed his mind and hammered with his fists on the desk. The door
opened and Matt wheeled himself in.

‘Would - you - care - for - a - game - of - chess?’ he enquired with metallic
politeness. Lobos swung around, lifted his ray gun, and disintegrated Matt.



Table of Contents
5 Rescue
6 The Final Phase
1 AD 0000
5 Rescue
6 The Final Phase
2 Exploration
5 Rescue
6 The Final Phase
3 Discovery
5 Rescue
6 The Final Phase
4 Capture
5 Rescue
6 The Final Phase