Materialising in outer space, the TARDIS is attacked by amissile fired from
the dark side of the moon.

Back on Earth, the newly-formed United Nations Intelligence Taskforce,
led by Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart, is disturbed by a series of UFO sightings
over Southern England.

Meanwhile, a large consignment of mysterious crates is delivered to the
headquarters of International Electromatix, the largest computer and
electronics firm in the world.

Three seemingly unconnected events—but in reality the preparations for a
massive Cyberman invasion of Earth with one aim—the total annihilation of the
human race.



ISBN 0 426 20169 8

DOCTORWHO



THE INVASION

Based on the BBC television serial by Derrick Sherwin from a story outline by
Kit Pedler by arrangement with the British Broadcasting Corporation



IAN MARTER

published by
The Paperback Division of
W. H. Allen & Co. PLC



CONTENTS

Prologue

1 Home Sweet Home?
2 Old Friends
3 Cat and Mouse
4 Hitching Lifts
5 Skeletons and Cupboards
6 Secret Weapons
7 Underground Operations
8 Invasion
9 Counter Measures
10 The Nick of Time

A Target Book
Published in 1985
by the Paperback Division of W. H. Allen & Co. PLC
44 Hill Street, London W1X 8LB

First published in Great Britain by
W.H. Allen and Co. PLC in 1985

Novelisation copyright © Ian Marter 1985
Original script copyright © Kit Pedler and Derrick Sherwin 1968
'Doctor Who' series copyright © British Broadcasting Corporation 1968, 1985

Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Anchor Brendon Ltd, Tiptree, Essex

The BBC producer of The Invasion was Peter Bryant the director was Douglas
Camfield

ISBN 0 426 20169 8

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or
otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated without the publisher's
prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the
subsequent purchaser.



Prologue

The Doctor sat hunched in his rickety chair, biting his nails anxiously and staring
grimly around him in the crackling air as everything swam sickeningly back into
focus. He uttered a whoop of relief as his two young friends reappeared, clinging
on for dear life to the wobbling and sparking navigation console in the middle of
the TARDIS control chamber. With a few spasmodic shudders the ancient machine
finally shook itself together and settled, its harsh groans and staccato wheezes dying
gradually away into eerie silence.

Jamie, a robust young Highlander clad in faded kilt and sporran, tattered
sleeveless sheepskin waistcoat and sturdy boots, turned thankfully to Zoe and grinned
shakily. 'We're all right, ma wee lassie. It worked!' he exclaimed, his voice cracking
with nervous tension.

Zoe attempted a pale smile. She was a bright-eyed teenager with a large face,
wide mouth and short black hair and she was wearing a tomboyish trouser-suit. She
swallowed hard and glanced inquiringly at the thoughtful Doctor. 'Are we on our way
at last?' she asked hopefully.

The Doctor still sat staring suspiciously at the motionless control column, his
mouth drawn sharply down, his black eyebrows ruckled and his small hands knotted
uncertainly together. 'I suppose I'd better have a look,' he murmured hesitantly. He
looked rather like an old-fashioned fairground showman as he shuffled over to the
console and fussed with the switches and indicators in his concertinad check trousers,
worn boots and shabby knee-length coat, tucking the frayed cuffs of his grubby shirt
out of the way. He licked a finger as if for luck and pressed a button, glancing
apprehensively across at a video screen set into the chamber wall.

A large dark globe took shape against a breathtaking background of brilliant
stars. The globe was pitted and scarred and ringed with a bright iridescent halo.

'The Moon!' cried Zoe in surprise.
Slowly the Doctor leaned forward, as though he suspected some kind of trick.

'The Solar Corona,' he whispered, adjusting the focus and throwing the lunar craters
into sharp relief round the Moon's rim. 'We appear to be stranded on the dark side,
I'm afraid.'

The Doctor's ominous words caused Zoe and Jamie to exchange uneasy glances
in the tense silence. The disintegration of the TARDIS in their previous adventure
had been a horrifying experience and now it seemed that the ramshackle police box
had managed to reassemble itself only to end up marooned behind the Moon.

'What d'ye mean, Doctor... Stuck?' Jamie inquired nervously.
The Doctor was poking about among the racks of printed circuits inside the

hexagonal column. 'I mean stuck,' he replied, sniffing with embarrassment as he
pulled out a suspect panel and studied it guiltily.

Suddenly Zoe's eyes opened wide. 'What's that?' she cried, pointing to the screen.
A small speck of light had appeared on the Moon's pockmarked surface. As they
watched, it seemed to grow rapidly larger and brighter.

'Looks like a volcano or something,' Jamie murmured excitedly.
The Doctor ruffled his mop of thick black hair and blinked unhappily at the

strange phenomenon. 'Not on the Moon, Jamie.'
All of a sudden Zoe grabbed the Doctor's threadbare sleeve.



It's coming towards us!' she gasped.
There was a violent clatter as the delicate circuit panel slipped out of the Doctor's

fingers. 'Don't fluster me, Zoe,' he chided her, picking it up carefully. 'The orientation
circuits are jammed. It may take a while to fix.'

'But Doctor, we must move out of the way!' Zoe insisted.
'We've only got a few seconds!'
On the screen, the mysterious gleaming object seemed to be almost upon them.
'It looks like a missile,' Jamie said, gaping in fascination.
'Someone's fired a missile at us!'
'Someone? From the Moon?' snorted the Doctor, peering intently at the faulty

circuits. He flexed the small panel a few times, traced his finger round its intricate
connections and then popped it back into its slot in the column.

'Please hurry up, Doctor,' pleaded Zoe, hypnotised like Jamie by the weird
glinting craft growing in the centre of the screen.

'Oh, do be quiet,' snapped the Doctor, flicking a series of switches and glaring
irritably at the inert instruments. Once again he removed the panel and this time held
it up to examine its complex structure against the increasingly brilliant glow from the
video screen. Suddenly he emitted a squawk of terror. Zoe just managed to catch the
panel before it hit the floor a second time.

'What the dickens is that?' croaked the Doctor, gazing open-mouthed at the
looming alien image. The next moment he snatched the circuit panel from be. 'Don't
just stand there gawping, child!' he shouted, struggling to insert it back into its slot. He
kicked the control column a few times and rummaged his fingers feverishly among
the switches.

Ashen-faced, Jamie clutched Zoe's shoulder convulsively.
'We're too late, lassie, we'll never make it...' he gulped.
The Doctor thumped the console and unleashed a tirade of insults against his

juddering machine as it growled reluctantly back into operation. Then, like a crazed
concert pianist he madly manipulated the switches and savagely kicked the column
while staring defiantly up at the gigantic threat blotting out the Moon and the galaxies
beyond.

Seconds later there was a colossal explosion. The TARDIS and its precious
contents burst asunder into an infinity of separate fragments. In the place where it had
been, a vast silver craft passed silently through space, as if it had never existed.



1

Home Sweet Home?
Only the sound of leisurely munching disturbed the sunlit air as the herd of

Friesian cows cropped the lush grass, occasionally raising their heads to gaze placidly
around as they chewed contentedly. Suddenly they paused and turned in unison
towards the centre of their meadow where a small area of buttercups had become
mysteriously flattened. A chorus of mooing erupted from the motionless herd, but a
moment later it was silenced by a raucous trumpetingwhich quickly became a banshee
wailing. A hazy blue outline topped by a fitfully flashing amber beacon gradually
materialised on the flattened grass. Silently the cows watched as the chipped, lopsided
police box settled and solidified and the beacon stopped flashing. Then, with one
voice, the herd broke into a furious lowing in protest at the alien intruder.

Inside the TARDIS the three companions hauled themselves groggily to their
feet.

'Well done, old girl,' giggled the Doctor nervously. 'Just in the nick of time.' He
patted the console affectionately. 'Another nanosecond and we'd have been nullified!'

Zoe and Jamie looked daggers at the dapper Time Lord.
'Well, who'd fire a missile at us?' Zoe demanded after an awkward silence.
The Doctor smiled sheepishly and shrugged. 'Better find out where we are,' he

suggested, fiddling with the scanner switches.
They froze as a strange rnoaning sound suddenly rose in the distance and then

gradually died away.
Jamie frowned. 'Whatever's wrong wi' the TARDIS, Doctor? It seems to go

wrong all the time now,' he protested.
The Doctor tried to focus the blurred images on the screen. 'It just needs a bit of

an overhaul, Jamie, like any other machine,' he replied defensively.

Zoe glared at the scanner. 'Not much good if you haven't got any spare parts is
it?' she retorted huffily.

All at once she jumped, stifling a scream. The video screen was almost filled by
a vast cavernous mouth yawning at them.

We are obviously not on the Moon anyway,' the Doctor chuckled, as the weird
moaning sounded again and several more cows nosed curiously into the picture.

'Earth again,' Jamie groaned gloomily.
The Doctor nodded eagerly. 'It looks like England. If it's the twentieth century I

could look up an old friend - Professor Travers -
I'm sure he'd let me use his laboratory to knock up a few replacement components

for the old girl...' The Doctor hesitated. 'Unless, of course, he's still a babe in arms!'
he grinned, deftly removing two circuit panels from the control console and stuffing
them in his pocket. 'Let's go and see,' he urged them, making for the door.

Zoe was still staring at the mooing herd on the screen. 'I wonder whether that
thing we saw behind the Moon is in this time zone or not?' she murmured uneasily.

'You mean whoever took a pot at us could still be lurking aboot?' Jamie said
quietly.

'Do come along, you two!' complained the Doctor, grabbing them each by the
hand and dragging them after him.



As they emerged into the sunshine, the cows lumbered away still mooing with
disapproval. The Doctor turned to lock the door, but the TARDIS was nowhere to be
seen. Zoe and Jamie cast their eyes to the clear blue sky in despair.

The Doctor took the two panels out of his pocket, frowned at them and then
tapped his nose knowingly. 'No danger of getting a parking ticket!' he mused with a
grin. Then he set off towards a gate in the distant hedge with Zoe and Jamie trailing
unenthusiastically in his wake.

They trudged along the narrow country lane while the Doctor hopped
optimistically about, seeking a clue as to the century in which they had fortunately
materialised. All at once a whining drone made them pause and listen. They scanned
the empty skies.

'Helicopter?' Zoe suggested.

The Doctor shrugged. 'Post Industrial Revolution anyway, my dear,' he cried and
breezily set off again.

The noise grew louder and suddenly a small covered truck swung recklessly
round a bend and sped up behind them. The Doctor grabbed his friends and scampered
into the hedge, urgently signalling with his cocked thumb. The truck braked fiercely
and lurched to a halt some distance further on, its diesel racing impatiently.

Straightening his rumpled collar and sagging cravat, the Doctor scuttled round
to the driver's door. 'Good day, sir, I wonder if you could help us...?' he began.

The young ginger-haired driver wearing sweat-stained teeshirt and oily jeans
shot him a frightened glance. 'Are you trying to get out?' he shouted.

'Actually we wish to go in... to London,' smiled the Doctor.
'Get in quick.'
'Oh, that's most civil of you...' bowed the Doctor.
'Shut up and get in,' yelled the driver, revving the hot smoking engine.
Seconds later the bewildered trio were jammed into the noisy cab and being flung

violently around as the truck roared through the twisting lanes. After a few kilometres
the driver swung the truck abruptly onto a deeply-rutted cart track which bounced
them sickeningly into a small shady wood.

Killing the engine, he jumped out. 'Get away from the truck!'
he shouted, diving into the tangled undergrowth.
Totally mystified, the Doctor led his young companions in pursuit. They soon

found the driver crouching in the bushes, wiping his freckled lace with a rag.
'Is something wrong?' asked the Doctor gently, crouching beside him.
'Company Security are on my tail,' he gasped.
'What company?' Zoe demanded.
The driver gave her a sarcastic grin. 'There's only one Company isn't there, miss?'
The Doctor motioned the others to keep quiet. 'I'm sorry, but we're strangers

here,' he explained.

The young man looked incredulous. 'Strangers? You mean you're not from the
Community?' he muttered after a pause.

They all shook their heads.
'Then how the hell did you get into the compound?'
The Doctor smiled enigmatically. 'That's a long story, I'm afraid.'



Zoe glanced around uneasily. 'What's this compound? Are we prisoners here or
something?'

The driver leaned closer. 'Those who haven't gone over to the Company are.
Course, not officially. They just make it rather difficult if you don't have a pass,' he
confided.

Jamie's clear blue eyes narrowed. 'What about yerself?'
The fugitive listened a moment and then grinned bleakly. 'I managed to get in

all right. Getting out again's the problem now.'
The Doctor frowned suspiciously. 'This company you mentioned... What does

it do exactly?' he inquired.
The young man stared at the strangers in disbelief.
'International Electromatix, of course. You must know about them.
They've got a world monopoly in electronic equipment. They...'
The approaching howl of powerful motorcycle engines suddenly silenced him.

Turning pale, he dragged the odd trio deeper into the thicket. They waited, scarcely
breathing. Then all at once they glimpsed a flash of gleaming metal and bright black
leather as two motorbikes zipped past the end of the cart track.

When all was quiet again, their rescuer continued. 'They've set up a whole
Community of their own... research facilities, factories...

housing complexes... inside a network of compounds. Most of the locals joined
the Company.'

'What about the ones who didn't?' murmured Zoe.
'My people haven't been able to trace them.'
'Your people...?' the Doctor cut in sharply, eyes widening.
The driver bit his dry lips, regretting his careless remark.
Cautiously he stood up. 'Should be safe now,' he told them. 'You three'd better

keep out of sight in the back. I'll try and bluff our way out.'

A short drive through peacefully deserted countryside brought them to a high
chainlink fence, slung between steel posts and topped with several strands of wicked-
looking barbed wire, stretching into the distance in both directions. Electric gates
barred the road. A heavily armed security guard strode out from the squat concrete
blockhouse. Hewas dressed in a black uniform of thick glossymaterial with gauntlets,
high boots and a ridged steel helmet incorporating a dark visor beneath which only
his thin-lipped mouth was visible. On the front of his helmet was a silver insignia
representing a zig-zag of lightning in the grip of a clenched glove.

The guard's faceless mask bulbously reflected the driver's pale smile as he
showed his pass. The guard stared into the cab and then marched round to look in
the back. He glanced at the stacks of papier-mâché trays and slammed the doors. The
gates whirred open and the truck drove through.

It was barely out of sight before two similar guards riding huge motorcycles
skidded to a stop just as the gates were closing. Jumping off they ran towards the
blockhouse, leaving the massive engines throbbing in anticipation.

Huddled among the trays of eggs the three friends heaved a sigh of relief at
their narrow escape, but their euphoria was short-lived. After a few minutes the truck



shuddered to a halt again and the driver's frightened grey eyes peered through the
shutter from the cab.

'They're right behind us. Get out here and you'll find the London road about five
kilometres due east,' he shouted above the clattering diesel.

Muttering their gratitude the trio jumped out of the back and fought their way
painfully through the tall prickly hedge just as the two motorbikes roared round a
bend and coasted up behind the truck.

Led by the Doctor, they set off for dear life across the fields in search of the
main road.

'What's that?' Zoe gasped, as a dull thundering sound suddenly started up behind
them.

'Don't even ask,' panted the Doctor without glancing round. 'I think it's a bull.'

One security guard searched the truck while the other glanced cursorily at the
driver's pass.

'You come back with us,' he ordered.
'What for? The pass is okay,' protested the driver. The other guard strode up

shaking his head. 'Nothing,' he snapped.
'Turn round!' rapped the first guard.
The driver refused. You can't force me back into the compound.'
The next moment he flinched as a cold pistol barrel was shoved against his

temple. 'We're not on International Electromatix property now,' he persisted, defiantly
slipping the truck into gear.

'You've got no authority out here.'
The safety catch clicked off.
'You want me, arrested, you get the police!' he shouted, revving the engine.
The next moment half the driver's head had been blown off all over the inside of

the cab. The truck lurched forward and then toppled sideways into the ditch. A stack
of papier-mache trays crashed through the open back doors and hundreds of vivid
yellow egg yolks started merging and congealing on the hot black tar.

Intermittent spots of rainwere falling from the overcast London sky as theDoctor
led Zoe and Jamie up the steps of a tall terraced house with flaking pillared porch in
Bayswater. Tired and hungry, they stared gloomily at the nameplate above the bell-
push.

'That's odd,' frowned the Doctor. It says "Professor Watkins".'
He shrugged and pressed the button. 'Still, the telephone directory said number

thirteen...'
'It would!' Zoe grumbled, scowling up at the tarnished chrome 13 on the door.
They waited. The Doctor rang again and peered through the frosted glass panes.
'Och, dinna tell me we've come all this way for nothing,' Jamie mumbled

dejectedly.
Just then a distorted white shape appeared behind the glass and the door was

flung open.

'I happen to be trying to work.' The tall girl turned on her heel and stalked off
down the bare shabby hall, leaving them stranded on the doorstep.

The Doctor cleared his throat politely. 'I'm so sorry, miss...



We're looking for Professor Travers...' He motioned the others to follow him and
ventured after her.

They found the girl in a large high-ceilinged room which was virtually empty
except for several powerful lamps on stands scattered about and an expensive camera
mounted on a tripod. Huge blown-up photographs, mostly of the girl herself, were
pinned haphazardly around the white walls.

'And now the beastly thing's jammed!' snapped the girl, fiddling angrily with the
camera shutter. She was taller than Zoe, with long fair hair, wide mouth and high
cheekbones. Her dazzling dress was cut well above the knee and her shapely legs
were clad in stylish knee-length boots.

'Perhaps I can mend it for you?' the Doctor suggested, wincing at the colourful
geometrical pattern on her dress.

'It was on automatic shutter.'
'I see,' smiled the Doctor. 'Taking pictures of yourself?'
'Until you interrupted me. Then it stuck.'
The Doctor examined the camera while Zoe glanced at the photographs

admiringly and Jamie gaped open-mouthed at the flamboyant figure as she re-
arranged her hair in a huge mirror propped against the ornate mantelpiece.

'By the way, if you've come to see my uncle he's not here,' the girl informed
them abruptly. 'I presume you're another nut, a fellow boffin,' she said disapprovingly,
glancing at the Doctor's dishevelled reflection.

'I'm seeking Professor Travers's help,' murmured theDoctor, poking thoughtfully
at the camera's mechanism with his penknife.

'Travers has gone to the States for a year with his daughter,'
shrugged the girl.
Jamie nudged Zoe irritably. 'Och, another wild-goose chase,'
he muttered bitterly.
The girl glared at the wild-looking young Highlander and then went on. 'My

uncle - Professor Watkins - wanted to do some secret work and Professor Travers
said he could use the lab in the basement here.' The girl elbowed Jamie out of the way
and adjusted one of the lamps. 'I moved in because I was kicked out of my studio
last week.'

'A'm no surprised,' Jamie mumbled darkly to himself.
The Doctor tested the shutter a few times. 'What field of science does your uncle

work in?' he asked.
The girl grimaced and shook her head. 'He messes about with computers all the

time. Complete nutter.'
'How very fortunate,' smiled the Doctor, handing her the camera. 'Professor

Watkins may be able to help us. Is he at home?'
The girl shook her head. 'Fixed it? Great. Thanks.'
'Where is your uncle?' demanded Zoe impatiently.
The girl rounded on her irritably. 'How should I know? I'm not his keeper.'

Suddenly her expression changed and she peered at Zoe through the viewfinder.
'Hey... Dolly gear!' she exclaimed delightedly.

The Doctor ruffled his hair in confusion. 'Who's Dolly Gear?'
he inquired.
'Want to pose for me?' the girl chattered on, pushing Zoe in front of the lamps.

'Now throw your arms up and bend at the knees...



Head back a bit...'
Rather resentfully Zoe tried to do as she was bidden, while Jamie watched with

a satirical grin.
'Well, miss...' the Doctor persevered.
'Isobel,' the girl replied, her motorised shutter whizzing off shots of Zoe in quick

succession.
'Isobel. Do you know when your uncle will return?'
'Nope. He left about a week ago. Haven't seen him since...'
Isobel replied vaguely, manoeuvering Zoe into a different pose as if she were

a mannequin. 'He was raving on about some new process these people wanted him
to develop.'

The Doctor was restlessly tapping the two faulty circuits in his coat pocket 'Can't
we get in touch with him, my dear?' he pleaded. 'It is rather urgent.'

'I tried the other day. They said he couldn't take any phone calls.'
'Who did?'

'Oh... International something,' muttered Isobel, clicking away again, as Zoe
began to enjoy her new role as model.

'International Electromatix?' Jamie suggested.
Isobel ignored him. 'The number's scribbled on the wall above the phone. By

the stairs.'
The Doctor heaved an enormous sigh of relief, thankful to have got sornewhere

at last. With Jamie close on his heels, he hurried out.
Zoe made as if to follow them.
'Don't move,' cried Isobel, still snapping away. 'You're a natural. I don't often get

the chance to photograph a real model. Too expensive.'
Flattered, Zoe lingered on. Then Isobel paused and led her over to a battered old

wicker skip.
'Let's find you some different gear,' she laughed.

Jamie stared at the hieroglyphic maze of names and numbers scrawled on the
wall behind the telephone while the Doctor dialled.

'Suppose this is the same organisation the truck driver was telling us about,' he
whispered. 'Perhaps the Professor's been...'

The Doctor nodded grimly. Then he suddenly flinched as a harsh metallic female
voice rasped in the earpiece.

'International Electromatix. State your business.'
'I wish to speak to Professor Watkins please,' requested the Doctor.
There was a brief pause.
'Party not available,' grated the voice.
'It is rather important,' continued the Doctor courteously.
'Perhaps I could leave a...'
'Party not available... Party not available...'
'Oh, fiddlesticks!' hissed the Doctor, slamming down the receiver. 'It's the curse

of the Technological Age, Jamie. A robot answering machine.'
'I don't think you'll get any joy!' Isobel yelled from the other room.
Jamie sent a murderous look down the hall. 'What now, Doctor?' he asked

dejectedly.



The Doctor rubbed his hands together expectantly. 'Nothing for it, Jamie. We'll
have to pay International Electromatix a little visit.'

Returning to the makeshift studio, they found Zoe decked out in long curving
eyelashes and a fluffy feather boa posing extravagantly in the glaring lights.

Jamie burst out laughing. 'Och, lassie, ye look like a wee chicken wi' all those
feathers,' he roared.

Zoe took no notice. 'Any luck, Doctor?' she asked hopefully.
The Doctor shook his head. 'We shall have to go there in person I'm afraid, my

dear.'
Zoe wrinkled her nose uninterestedly. 'I think I'll stay here,' she said, twirling the

boa seductively in the Doctor's face. 'This is jolly good fun.'
The Doctor nodded in reluctant agreement and asked Isobel if she knew the

address of International Electromatix.
'Oh, that's scribbled up on the wall somewhere too,' she giggled.
'Och, don't ye ever write anything down on paper?' Jamie exclaimed as the

Doctor shuffled out.
'I'd only lose it if I did. The wall's safer,' Isobel explained.
'Can't lose a wall, can you!'
The two girls howled in mutual appreciation of the joke.
Glowering humourlessly, Jamie trudged out after the Doctor.

The headquarters of International Electromatix turned out to be a tall slim tower
of steel and glass surrounded by lower buildings, all faced with identical rows of
reflective coppertint windows, situated in the City. Jamie and the Doctor paused to
examine the huge bronze plaque above the entrance, with its symbolic zig-zag spark
gripped in a giant fist, before marching resolutely through the automatic glass doors
and into the deserted circular foyer.

Unknown to them, two men crouched on the flat roof of an anonymous office
block opposite were observing them intently - one through powerful binoculars, the
other through the viewfinder of a polaroid camera. They wore drab suits with narrow
dark ties and both had short military haircuts. The larger man with the binoculars
spoke tersely into a compact walkie-talkie.

'They're just going inside now... Tracey's getting them on film.'
The smaller man ripped the film out of the camera and hugged it under his arm

to speed up the developing process.
The big man listened to his radio. 'Roger, sir. Benton out,' he said, switching off.

Ducking below the parapet he crawled across to Tracey and examined the photograph.
'HQwant those two Top Priority,' he said. 'We pick them up as soon as they come out.'

Tracey uttered a curt laugh. ' If they come out,' he grunted.

The Doctor glanced contemptuously at the plastic chairs arranged facing a
semicircle of small computer terminals in the middle of the glass foyer. 'I suppose
this is Reception,' he muttered distastefully, sitting in front of a terminal which had
lit up expectantly as they entered.

'International Electromatix. State your business,' rapped the machine.
'I wish to see Professor Watkins,' stated the Doctor.
'One moment...'



Behind a perspex screen above the terminals, tape spools jerked spasmodically
back and forth.

'Party not available. Good day,' the machine announced at last.
The Doctor squirmed with suppressed indignation. 'Then I wish to see someone

in authority,' he retorted.
'Key in identity. Request will be considered and appointment arranged.'
'That's no good,' insisted the Doctor, 'I wish to see someone now.'
'All personnel engaged.'
The Doctor's normally sallow features flushed with outrage. 'I insist,' he shouted.

'This is an emergency.'
'Inform exact nature of emergency,' instructed the mechanical receptionist, its

spools spinning busily.
'It is a personal matter.'
There was a brief pause. 'Personal matters merit no emergency status,' the grating

voice announced. 'Key in identity and...'
The Doctor's nimble fingers played a frenzied sequence of random keys on the

keyboard. 'There. Work that out!' he snapped, leaping out of the chair. He strode over
to the gleaming chromium-plated doors leading into the building itself and Jamie
scampered nervously after him.

High above them in the penthouse suite of offices at the top of the tower, two
men stood in a spacious clinical roomwatching the two intruders on a bank of circular
closed-circuit video monitors. The combination of swept-back silver hair and thick
black eyebrows gave the older man a disturbing appearance. His right eye was
permanently half-closed, but his left gazed wide open with chilling pale blue iris and
huge black pupil. His clothes were coldly elegant: a plain suit with collarless jacket,
round-necked shirt and gleaming black shoes with chrome buckles. Head tilted
slightly back, he watched the multiple images of the Doctor and Jamie as if they were
specimens under a microscope.

'Do you recognise them, Packer?' he murmured in a leisurely cultured voice.
Packer, dressed in black security personnel outfit minus the helmet and visor,

shook his head. 'No,MrVaughn.' His small black eyes gleamedwith sadistic alertness,
but his pale waxy face tapered to a weak receding jaw. His voice was thin and devious.

Vaughn sat down in a large padded swivel chair facing the vast semicircular
chrome desk. Behind him the grey panorama of London stretched beyond the wide
curving window through half-open vertical louvres. Reaching forward, he selected
new pictures as Jamie and the Doctor walked down a long starkly-lit corridor, peering
suspiciously around them. 'Most intriguing,' Vaughn murmured calmly, reclining his
chair and staring impassively at the bank of monitors on the wall opposite. 'Deal with
them, Packer.'

The Doctor was cautiously leading the way along the silent deserted corridor
when, all at once, a glass wall slid across their path.

Before they could even turn round a second panel glided across behind them,
trapping them like fish in an aquarium. A sinister hissing issued from narrow vents
near the ceiling and within a few seconds the Doctor and Jamie were overcome by
a soporific gas.



They sank to the floor, their fingers squeaking eerily against the glass barrier.
A fewminutes later, Packer arrived accompanied by two armed subordinates. He

inserted a special key into the wall and the glass shutters silently withdrew. With cold
detachment Packer turned Jamie's motionless body over with his steel toecapped boot.

Suddenly Jamie grabbed Packer's foot and twisted it viciously sideways. Yelping
with pain and shock, Packer pitched spreadeagled on the floor. But before the dazed
young Scot could follow up his attack, the two guards each grabbed an ear and yanked
Jamie to his knees.

Packer struggled to his feet and gazed down at Jamie, beads of sweat breaking
out all over his waxy white face. 'Wait!' he whined, balancing himself to kick his
assailant in the face. 'This is going to be a pleasure...'

At that moment, Vaughn's velvet tones filled the corridor from concealed
speakers. 'Packer, where are your manners? Escort our visitors to my office
immediately.'

Packer froze, like a child caught stealing sweets. 'But I haven't interrogated them
yet,' he pleaded, as the Doctor stirred and sat up groggily.

At once, Packer,' Vaughn purred insistently.
Jamie helped the Doctor up, staring at Packer with defiant contempt as he

dutifully motioned to the guards to take them up to his master.

2



Old Friends

Vaughn rose to greet the Doctor and Jamie as theywere shown into his penthouse
office. 'Please be seated, gentlemen,' he beamed courteously. 'Thank you, Packer,' he
added coldly. His deputy lingered on the threshold until a dismissive gesture finally
sent him resentfully outside.

The Doctor's keen eye quickly took in the artificial potted plants, the self-
adjusting suspended light fittings and the comprehensive array of facilities ranged
at Vaughn's fingertips. 'I knew there must be a human being in here somewhere,' he
grinned, sitting down.

Vaughn bowed. 'I apologise for my staff's over-zealous behaviour but your
arrival was a trifle unconventional.'

Jamie's hackles rose. 'Maybe, but there was no need to...'
The Doctor interrupted tactfully. 'I think perhaps we are the ones who should

apologise, Mister...'
'Vaughn... Tobias Vaughn... Director of International Electromatix. I must say

your business with Professor Watkins must be very urgent to force you to such
extremes.'

Jamie sat up in astonishment. 'Hey, how did ye ken we were wanting the
Professor?'

Vaughn gestured with well manicured hands towards his enormous desk. 'My
computer reports everything directly to me,' he smiled.

'Everything?' the Doctor echoed innocently.
Vaughn nodded. 'But I regret that your visit has been wasted.
Professor Watkins is engaged on a new project and he refuses to see anyone,'

he said sadly.
The Doctor looked crestfallen.
'Perhaps I can help?' Vaughn suggested brightly.

Jamie nudged his silent friend. 'Och, it's only a couple of dud circuits, Doctor,
surely a place like this could...' He trailed into silence as the Doctor glanced at him
warningly.

Vaughn leaned forward eagerly. 'Circuits? Electronics?' he purred. 'My
technicians are the best in the world. I am sure they could assist you, gentlemen.'

The Doctor shook his head. 'Thank you, Mr Vaughn, but the circuits are... are
most complex.'

Vaughn gestured expansively. 'Complexity is our speciality,'
he insisted, holding out his hands. 'At least let us try.'
The Doctor hesitated, glancing reproachfully at Jamie.
Eventually he reluctantly handed over the two small panels he had removed from

the TARDIS earlier. Vaughn seized them eagerly and examined them, his left eye
narrowing to match the right. The Doctor noted the momentary shadow of
astonishment that passed over his face.

But Vaughn swiftly recovered his composure. 'As you say, a trifle complex. But
I am convinced we can help. I'll have them sent to our Diagnostic Unit at once,' he
proposed generously.

The Doctor smiled weakly. 'You're extremely kind,' he muttered.



'Not at all. Any friend of ProfessorWatkins...' Vaughn paused, as though he were
disturbed by the two silicon panels in front of him.

Quickly he opened a drawer, took out a tiny miniaturised radio and offered it to
Jamie. 'Do you have one of these, young man?' he asked.

Jamie looked blank. 'Och no, sir. What is it?'
Vaughn looked surprised. 'Disposable transistor radios. A market leader. Surely

you've seen them? We've sold ten million in the UK alone. Modest compensation for
Packer's excesses, I trust?'

'Most generous,' said the Doctor, prompting Jamie to accept.
Jamie took the radio and fiddled with it. Suddenly a raucous pop tune blared

forth. 'So that's how it goes!' he grinned.
Wincing at the din, the Doctor leaned across and switched it off. 'And that's how

it stops, Jamie,' he advised firmly.
Vaughn rose regretfully. 'If you'll excuse me I have an urgent meeting,' he

declared. 'Mr Packer will show you out.'

The Doctor jabbed his elbow in Jamie's ribs and they stood up.
'Thank you so much, Mr Vaughn,' he burbled.
'Telephone in a day or two. We should have some news then,'
Vaughn proposed as they shook hands cordially at the door. 'And may I ask

whom I have had the pleasure...?'
'Not Whom... Who...' the Doctor quipped slyly.
Packer took them down in the express lift and showed them out through a side

entrance off a quiet cul de sac. 'Next time read the instructions at Reception,' he
snarled.

'Och, so ye can read, can ye?' Jamie exclaimed in mock surprise. 'And what other
tricks can ye do?'

The Doctor firmly steered his rash young friend into the narrow street as Packer
slammed the steel emergency door behind them.

'Friendly sort of chap, Mr Vaughn,' Jamie remarked, flourishing the miniature
radio.

'Not what he seems,' the Doctor snapped unhappily. 'The normal human blinks
naturally about once every fifteen seconds.

Vaughn averaged less than one a minute.'
'Aye, and he's got horns and a forked tail too.'
'No, I'm serious, Jamie,' the Doctor warned as they walked towards the main

street. 'Vaughn didn't even ask me what was wrong with those circuits or what they
do. Beneath all that charm there's something... something not quite human.'

The next moment a large Jaguar saloon raced down the side street behind them
and skidded up onto the pavement, trapping them against the wall of the IE Building.
While Tracey remained at the wheel gunning the engine, Benton and another man
leaped out and manhandled them into the back before they could even protest. Then
Tracey accelerated away with spinning wheels and smoking tyres.

Jammed between the two bulky figures, the shocked and bewildered captives
exchanged frightened glances.

Eventually the Doctor turned to Benton. 'And I suppose this is Mr Vaughn's
courtesy car service?' he commented, with an acid smile.



As soon as his unexpected visitors had departed, Vaughn picked up the two
silicon panels theDoctor had left on his desk and studied them carefully, a deep furrow
forming between his eyebrows as he tried to unravel the curious structure of the
circuitry. Eventually he looked up at the blank wall facing the panoramic window
and a strange smile spread gradually across his lopsided features. He put down the
panels and took an elaborate fountain pen from his breast pocket. Slowly he rose to
his feet. He twisted the gold-plated cap of the pen and with a series of soft clicks and
a subdued whirring sound the blank wall parted and slid aside.

Vaughn waited, gazing into the darkness beyond. Soon an oscillating hum began
to rise and a fluorescent light started to pulsate in sequence with it. The air started to
crackle with a dry electric charge as a fantastic structure appeared in the dark alcove.
Standing about two metres high, it resembled a gigantic radio valve. Bristling
electrodes sprouted from a revolving central crystal suspended within a delicate cage
of sparking, fizzing filaments. Cathode tubes were arranged like a belt of glass
ammunition around the base of the cage and the whole sparkling mechanism was
supported in a lattice of shimmering wires and tubes. The planes of the crystal
flickered with millions of tiny points of intense blue light and the apparatus possessed
a sinister beauty as it hovered in the darkness.

Vaughn touched some buttons on his desk and the bank of nine circular screens
flashed into life showing video replays of the Doctor and Jamie at their recent gate-
crashing exploits. Immediately the machine in the alcove began to whirr and spark
with increased excitement. Vaughn watched and waited, smiling expectantly.

Meanwhile, back at Professor Travers's house The was still striking exotic poses
with strange hats and the feather boa while Isobel shot roll after roll of 35mm film.
At long last Isobel announced a tea break and produced coffee and a mountain of
sandwiches.

Zoe collapsed gratefully onto a large psychedelic beanbag.
'Never imagined keeping still could be so exhausting,' she laughed, biting into a

doorstep of crusty bread and mashed sardine.

'It's been a real treat for me,' Isobel complimented her. 'I get sick of
photographing myself, but I can't afford proper models yet.'

'But you're very good,' Zoe said with her mouth full, gesturing at the large
portraits around the walls.

'Oh, I didn't take those,' Isobel admitted with a wry grin. 'I have to model to earn
the loot to pay for all this junk. I hope you'll be around for a while, Zoe,' she added,
offering her another sandwich.

Zoe shook her head sadly. 'I expect we'll be off again as soon as the Doctor gets
the circuits repaired.'

'Yes. Why are they so important?' Isobel asked, puzzled.
Zoe did her best to explain about the TARDIS.
'Sounds just like one of Uncle's lash-ups,' Isobel giggled dismissively. 'Daft as

a brush.'
Zoe suddenly looked very concerned.
'What's up? Don't you like sardines?' Isobel asked brightly.



Zoe nodded and attempted a smile. 'It's just that the Doctor and Jamie have been
gone ages,' she murmured. 'I've got the feeling something's happened to them.'

Isobel shrugged. 'Uncle's probably pressganged them into helping with his latest
brainwave.'

Zoe stood up decisively. 'Sorry,' she mumbled, 'it's just that whenever there's any
trouble around those two always jump right into it.'

Isobel drained her coffee and sprang up. 'Okay, Zoe. If you're really worried let's
go and look for them.'

Zoe smiled appreciatively at her new friend. But inside she suddenly felt cold
and hollow.

Several times during the hair-raising high speed journey through the North-
Eastern suburbs and out into the country the Doctor had tried to extract some snippet
of information from the three silent kidnappers, but all Benton would say was 'All
in good time, sir, all in good time.' Puzzled by this politeness, Jamie kept mouthing
queries at the Doctor, but he simply grimaced back at him to keep quiet. Occasionally
a burst of rock music would issue from Jamie's transistor and then the Doctor would
nudge him viciously in the ribs to turn it off.

Eventually the Jaguar bounced off the highway and sped through several
kilometres of woodland until it suddenly emerged onto a vast airfield. The airfield
was almost deserted except for a group of rundown Nissen huts, a few jeeps and
helicopters, and a massive Hercules Transport plane in camouflage paint, with service
trucks clustered under its huge wings. The ramp at the rear of its fuselage was open
and to the Doctor's and Jamie's astonishment the Jaguar hurtled straight towards it,
shot up the gentle slope and slithered to a stop centimetres from the inside bulkhead.
Even before they had time to clamber out of the car the ramp had started to close
behind them like a gigantic mouth.

An armed soldier with special shoulder flashes opened an oval door in the
bulkhead and Jamie and the Doctor were ushered through into a long, dimly lit
Operations Room. Along each side, rows of uniformed personnel sat at radar screens,
computer terminals and communications units, totally absorbed in their various
duties. Down the middle of the room, several officers sat at small desks on either side
of an enormous Situation Map mounted on a perspex frame running down the centre.
All personnel wore khaki berets and on their battledress pullovers a circular white
badge indentifying them as UNIT 2 Personnel.

At the far end of the Operations Room, a tall officer with Brigadier's insignia
rose from his sizeable command desk and strode to greet them. 'Nice to see you again,
Doctor!' he boomed, his strong square-jawed face and neatly clipped moustache
suggesting calm and confident authority.

The Doctor's eyes lit up with delighted relief. 'Colonel Lethbridge-Stewart!' he
cried, scuttling forward to shake hands warmly. 'What a lovely surprise.'

Lethbridge-Stewart smiledmodestly. 'Well, Brigadier actually, Doctor. I've gone
up in the world since we last met.'

Jamie thumped the Brigadier heartily on the shoulder. 'Aye, the Yeti!' he
exclaimed in recognition.

The Brigadier nodded politely. 'McCrimmon isn't it? Yes, we met in the
Underground. Must be four years ago now, all that Yeti business.'



'Och, it seems like a couple of weeks.'

'Jamie, time is relative...' the Doctor reminded the lad.
'Are you still rushing around the Universe making nonsense of it in your

machine... your TARDIS?' inquired the Brigadier heartily.
'Still travelling, Col... Brigadier,' smiled the Doctor modestly.
'But what's all this?' he demanded, spreading his arms. 'I'm beginning to feel like

Jonah inside the whale.'
'Ought to explain,' Lethbridge-Stewart boomed breezily, motioning to his guests

to sit down at his desk. He had a brief word with Benton and Tracey and they
immediately departed. Then he ordered a Sergeant to bring some tea. 'Sorry about
all the cloak and dagger routine,' he went on brightly, 'but sometimes my chaps are
a bit melodramatic. Fact is that since all that Yeti caper I've been in charge of a new
independent security force. Call ourselves UNIT or United Nations Intelligence
Taskforce.'

'A world police force?' mused the Doctor.
The Brigadier laughed. 'Not quite, Doctor. We don't actually arrest people.'
'You arrested us right enough,' Jamie retorted indignantly.
'Not quite, McCrimmon. We've got International Electromatix under constant

surveillance and we're keeping tabs on everyone going in and out. Your pictures were
transmitted here and I recognised you.'

'Most efficient,' the Doctor congratulated him.
The Brigadier turned to him confidentially. 'Fact is, Doctor, you two were lucky.

A lot of people have gone in there but they haven't come out again.'
The Doctor's eyes widened with fascination. He rubbed his nose attentively and

sniffed suspiciously. 'Curiouser and curiouser,'
he muttered.

Zoe and Isobel stood in the empty foyer of the International Electromatix
Building frowning warily at the silent computer terminals.

'Golly, it's creepy,' Isobel murmured with a shiver. 'I suppose everyone's gone
early as it's Friday and Monday's a Bank Holiday.'

Zoe sat down at a terminal that had suddenly lit up as she approached it.

'It's probably the same idiot machine that answers when you ring up,' Isobel
warned her.

'International Electromatix. State your business.'
Zoe spoke loudly and clearly at the blank screen. 'Inquiry reference two persons

seeking information regarding Professor Watkins.'
'One moment...' blurted the artificial voice.
The two girls waited impatiently while the tape spools spun behind the armoured

screen.
'No information. Good day,' the robot eventually announced.
Zoe flushed with irritation. 'Now listen to me, you boneheaded fruit machine, I

asked a simple question and I want a simple answer.'
The terminal repeated its terse message and fell silent. Isobel shrugged. 'You

see, Zoe, it's hopeless.'



Zoe's jaw set with determination. ' Itmay be, but I'm not,' she declared and started
tapping away at the keyboard in front of her.

Isobel looked scared and baffled. 'What are you up to, Zoe?'
'Just setting it a little conundrum in Algol.'
'What's Algol?' Isobel whispered, goggling at the complicated mass of symbols

appearing on the screen above Zoe's flying fingers.
'A sort of language for talking to computers, only this is a pidgin version,' Zoe

giggled.
Isobel noticed the tape spools whizzing back and forth with increasingly frantic

speed as a cacophony of furious buzzing noises erupted from the terminal itself. 'It
does seem to be getting a bit agitated,' she murmured.

'You bet it is,' Zoe chuckled, typing madly away. 'This problem happens to be
insoluble! Delete square... Print out Y to the minus X variable one... Integrate on
inversine...'

An unpleasant and sinister odour like melting plastic began to fill the foyer.
'Continuous integration... There...' Zoe concluded triumphantly, sitting backwith

folded arms to observe the outcome of her attack. 'That should give it quite a
headache!'

Dozens of floors above them, Tobias Vaughn stood by the dark alcove listening
to a harsh semi-human voice issuing from the glowing apparatus within.

'The images of the two humans have been analysed,' it informed him. 'They are
known to he hostile. They must be destroyed.'

Startled, Vaughn glanced across at the figures of the Doctor and Jamie frozen on
the video screens. 'Known to be hostile? But how can that be?' he whispered hoarsely.

'They are recognised from Planet Sigma Gamma 14.'
'Recognised from Planet...' Vaughn tailed into dumb astonishment.
The weird machine buzzed impatiently. 'They must be eliminated,' it screeched.
Vaughn pulled himself together and smiled cravenly at the eerily sparking

structure. 'I shall deal with them,' he promised soothingly.
The machine seemed to glare at him for several seconds. 'Our plans approach

completion,' it grated menacingly. 'Nothing must he permitted to obstruct them.'
'Nothing will,' Vaughn purred.
At that moment a buzzer sounded on the desk. Vaughn quickly twisted the top

of the fountain pen in his elegant fingers and the wall quietly glided hack into place
across the alcove.Mopping his glistening browwith a silk handkerchief, Vaughn sank
into his chair and composed himself.

'Enter,' he called calmly.
The door slid open to admit a tall, seedy individual dressed in a stained white

laboratory coat. His greasy black hair was flecked with dandruff and he constantly
chewed the ends of a bedraggled moustache.

Vaughn gazed at him with profound distaste. 'What do you make of these,
Gregory?' he snapped, pushing the Doctor's circuit panels across the desk at him.

Gregory turned them over and over with his thin grimy fingers, peering through
thick horn-rimmed glasses. Eventually he shook his large head and shrugged.



Vaughn's good eye narrowed. 'From my Chief Researcher I expect a more
intelligent response than that,' he said acidly.

'I'm sorry Mr Vaughn but I've never seen anything.like them before. Given time
I'm sure I could...' he babbled wretchedly.

'Then take time, my dear fellow,' Vaughn interrupted kindly.
Gregory nodded, evidently relieved to be let off the hook.
'Take one hour,' Vaughn muttered threateningly with a contrastingly benign

smile on his face.
Gregory stared back at his Director like a frightened prey. 'One hour. Yes, Mr

Vaughn, thank you,' he croaked, turning and slinking out of the office.
As the door slid shut, a series of warning buzzers sounded and the stills of Jamie

and the Doctor vanished from the screens. Vaughn glanced up in alarm to see Zoe
and Isobel at the reception console.

Smoke was belching from one of the terminals and snapping tapes were tangling
themselves into a froth of brown spaghetti.

'... Take more than a soldering-iron to sort that out...' Zoe was saying.
'Great,' cried Isobel admiringly. 'Wish I had my camera with me.'
Vaughn's face relaxed into a half-smile of ironic amusement.
He flicked a switch and leaned towards a slim microphone. 'Packer, saboteurs

in Reception...' he reported with icy contempt. 'Or are you taking your Bank Holiday
already?'

There was a mush of static and Packer's frantic voice squawked in reply. 'I'm on
to them, sir... I'll bring them up to you.'

Vaughn reclined in his comfortable chair and shook with silent laughter as he
watched the tell-tale screens.

Clutching steaming mugs of strong NAAFI tea, the Doctor and Jamie were
studying a large selection of photographs on the Brigadier's desk.

'That one's Gordon McLeod, Lecturer in Physics at Cambridge,' the Brigadier
noted, identifying one of the figures frozen in midstride on the steps of the
International Electromatix Building.

'And this is Billy Routledge, chap I knew at Sandhurst. Landed himself a cushy
little job at the Ministry of Defence.'

The Doctor peered at the blurred hurrying figure. 'All these people went into the
IE Building and never came out again?' he exclaimed sceptically.

'No, Doctor. Most of them did emerge eventually,' Lethbridge-Stewart corrected
him, 'but there was something jolly odd about them afterwards.'

'Odd?'
'Yes, Doctor. Take Billy for instance. He'd been extremely helpful with our

investigations into Vaughn's activities, but once he'd actually been inside the building
he started being difficult...

obstructive.'
Suddenly Jamie seized a photo from the pile. 'Look, Doctor, this is the man who

gave us a lift in his van this morning.'
The Brigadier looked disconcerted. 'You know this man?'
The Doctor nodded.



'His report is twenty-four hours overdue,' muttered the Brigadier anxiously.
'Whereabouts were you?'

The Doctor shrugged. 'Somewhere out in the countryside.'
'Some of Packer's gorillas were on his tail,' added Jamie.
'Good man, 013. One of our agents,' confided the Brigadier. 'I expect he's onto

something.'
The Doctor blew on his tea. 'Tell me more about this International Electromatix

set-up, Brigadier.'
'They control most of the worldwide computer production, Doctor. They made

their breakthrough a few years ago with something called Monolithic Circuit design
and stole a march on the entire industry.'

Jamie flourished his transistor radio. 'Vaughn gave me this.'
'That's just a commercial sideline, McCrimmon. They've made a fortune out of

teenyboppers.'
The Doctor coughed and nudged Jamie to restrain his temper.
'What's your interest in Vaughn and Company?' he asked the Brigadier.
'Well, they got so big I decided to run a routine check. It threw up some odd

things.'

'Like the disappearance of Professor Watkins,' remarked the Doctor, sipping the
treacly tea and grimacing with watering eyes. 'I don't suppose you have the authority
to search Vaughn's premises?'

'I'm afraid not, Doctor. The man's got too many friends in high places. My hands
are tied.'

The Doctor stared at the varnish-like deposit round the rim of his mug. Then he
turned resolutely to Jamie. 'Well, my boy, if we want to find Professor Watkins we'll
have to do it on our own,' he concluded.

Jamie nodded eagerly and gulped his sugary tea with relish.
Lethbridge-Stewart smiled apologetically. 'I am sorry, Doctor, but I can at least

offer you a little back-up support.' He turned to his Sergeant. 'Walters, bring me a
polyvox unit if there's one handy.'

As Walters went forward towards the cockpit section of the Hercules the
Brigadier reassured his visitors as best he could. 'We're on constant alert here, Doctor.
The polyvox will put you in direct contact with us at any time'

'Jolly good,' grinned the Doctor, shutting his eyes and sipping bravely at his tea.
A few minutes later Walters returned with a compact object resembling a small

pocket torch.
'Here you are,' boomed the Brigadier cheerfully, pressing a button to spring a

short aerial out of the end of the device. 'It's on a fixed frequency. Range about a
hundred kilometres. Just press the button and ask for me.'

'Splendid!' cried the Doctor appreciatively, draining his mug with a last heroic
gulp. 'As long as it doesn't play rock and roll it will come in very handy,' he added
glancing severely at Jamie who was already on his feet and raring to go.

Lethbridge-Stewart stood up briskly. 'Well, Doctor, if you're determined to
conduct your own investigation I'd better organise a chopper to take you back to
London. Some more tea before you go?'



The Doctor leaped out of his chair as if he'd been stung. 'No, thank you,' he
replied in a strangled voice, snatching up the polyvox unit. 'Perhaps some other time,
Brigadier...'

Zoe and Isobel stood nervously between two armed security officers in front of
Vaughn's desk, while Packer hovered shiftily in the background.

'You and your friend the Doctor have put me to considerable inconvenience
today,' Vaughn purred. 'First he breaks into the building and now you ruin a rather
expensive installation.'

'Only because it refused to answer our inquiry,' Isobel retorted.
Vaughn smiled. 'You are naturally concerned about your uncle, Miss Watkins,

but I can assure you that he is perfectly well, if a trifle uncooperative at the moment.
Indeed, your visit is most opportune.'

'Why?' Zoe demanded warily.
'The Professor needs to be encouraged to continue his invaluable work for us,'

explained Vaughn blandly.
Isobel shrugged. 'I can't persuade him to do anything.'
Vaughn leaned forward. 'No, but I can. Now!' he murmured icily.
The girls shivered slightly as they heard Packer sucking air through his crooked

teeth in eager anticipation.
'Mr Packet will take care of you while you're here,' Vaughn told them, nodding

to his Deputy. 'He enjoys showing visitors round our facilities.'
Packer grinned hideously. 'It will be a pleasure,' he promised, as the guards seized

their captives by the arms and propelled them out of the office.
'Oh, Packer.'
Packer turned round to find his master gazing at him with amused concern. 'Yes,

Mr.Vaughn?'
'Don't work too hard, will you?'

Once again the Doctor and Jamie found themselves staring with sinking hearts
at the number 13 on Professor Travers's front door, while the bell rang monotonously
inside.

'Och, they must've gone out,' Jamie sighed despondently.
Delving into his pocket the Doctor unearthed a small penknife bristling with

different sized blades and all manner of attachments.
Selecting one, he deftly poked it around in the lock and a few seconds later the

door clicked open. They went in, calling and whistling, but the house was silent.
In the studio they came across the remains of the sardine sandwiches. 'I don't

know what they are but I'm ravenous!' cried the Doctor, biting greedily into two thick
portions at once.

'Sardines!' Jamie cheered. 'Delicious, I'm fair starved.'
They finished the leftovers in silence. Then Jamie took out his transistor and a

deafening rock number suddenly blared out, causing the Doctor to choke on his last
mouthful. Snatching it away from Jamie, he was about to fling the offending device
into the grate when he changed his mind, switched it off and opened the back instead.

'Och, dinna wreck ma wee gift,' Jamie pleaded indignantly.



Ignoring him, the Doctor took out a watchmaker's eyeglass and carefully
scrutinised the inner surface of the plastic lid. 'Most ingenious...' he muttered after a
while. but I wonder what it's for?'

'What what's for?'
'There's a micromonolithic circuit etched into the back of this casing, Jarnie.'
'Aye, and what's that when it's at home?'
'A hyper complex miniature array,' replied the Doctor, taking out the eyeglass

and staring at Jamie with troubled eyes. 'But it has nothing whatever to do with simple
radio technology.'

While the Doctor fiddled about inside the radio, muttering to himself and taking
absent-minded swigs of cold coffee from Zoe's abandoned cup, Jamie wandered
aimlessly around the room scowling at the zany blow-ups of Isobel adorning the walls.
Suddenly he stopped in his tracks. 'Surely they'd leave us a wee note, Doctor,' he
suggested.

'On the wall!' shouted the Doctor, jumping up and tossing him the pieces of the
radio.

Jamie gaped at him in astonishment.
'You can't lose a wall can you!' the Doctor quipped, echoing Isobel's words as

he hurried into the hall.
Jamie trailed after him, gloomily contemplating the remains of his radio.
'Here we are,' the Doctor confirmed, twisting himself almost horizontal to

decipher a patch of barely legible scrawl beside the telephone. 'Oh my goodness me,'
he whispered. 'Gone to IE office to look for you. Z and I.'

The Doctor bounded to the front door and wrenched it open.
'Come on, Jamie, we must get after them!'
Jamie frowned wearily. 'Och, it's miles, Doctor. Could we no get a lift this time?'
The Doctor shook his head vehemently. 'No, we most certainly could not, Jamie.

We shall hail a taxi!' he insisted.

3



Cat and Mouse

Crouching beside the Doctor between two huge rubbish skips in the cul-de-sac
alongside the International Electrornatix Building, Jamie ground his teeth in
frustration.

'I thought we were going in there to find the lassies,' he complained.
The Doctor shook his head determinedly. 'We'd never get past that stupid

computer, Jamie. Besides, the girls might not be in there.
We don't want to aggravate Vaughn unnecessarily.'
'Then what the divil are we going to do?'
The Doctor took out the polyvox unit given him by the Brigadier, deployed the

aerial and pressed the call button. 'If the Brigadier's men are watching the building
they'll know whether the girls are inside or not,' he explained.

Eventually the Brigadier's voice crackled through a haze of interference. 'Sorry
about reception, Doctor, but we're airborne at the moment. Routine change of location
for security cover.'

The Doctor asked whether Zoe and Isobel had been sighted.
'Affirmative, Doctor. We have a report of two teenage females, one dark and one

fair, clad in strange attire. Went in about an hour ago.'
The Doctor grabbed Jamie's belt with his free hand to prevent the headstrong

Highlander from dashing to the rescue there and then.
He informed the Brigadier that they were going to try and enter the building

from the rear.
'Take care, Doctor,' crackled Lethbridge-Stewart. 'Youmay not be quite so lucky

this time. Give me a shout if you hit any snags.'
'Yes. Thank you, Brigadier. Under and off...'
'Over and out,' came the crisp response.
Jamie contemplated the Doctor with less than whole-hearted confidence as he

struggled to stow the aerial. 'Pity it doesn't play guid tunes like ma radio used to,' he
scoffed.

They stared across at the vast expanse of coppery glass towering above them.
'And how are we going to get in this time?' Jamie demanded sceptically.
The Doctor grinned mischievously. 'By train, of course. But we must hurry, or

we'll miss it...'
Far above the City streets, Vaughn reclined in his chair listening to Gregory's

bewildered report on the Doctor's two circuit panels.
'They just make no sense,' whined the wretched technician helplessly. 'The

connections seem completely illogical and the conductor material is no known alloy,
though it resembles Helenium.'

Vaughn took the panels and studied them, smiling mysteriously. 'Fascinating.
The Doctor intrigues me more and more,'

he murmured languidly.
'I can do more tests, Mr Vaughn...' Gregory offered anxiously.
Vaughn waved him away. 'I think I know the solution to this little mystery,' he

said quietly.



As soon as Gregory had gone, Vaughn took out his fountain pen and twisted the
cap. As the wall parted, revealing the secret apparatus, Vaughn rose and wandered
over to the alcove. 'I requiremore data concerning the individual known as theDoctor,'
he announced in a cold precise voice.

The machine fizzed and flickered before croaking its reply.
'You have sufficient information. The Doctor is an enemy and must be

destroyed.'
'You state that you recognise the Doctor from Planet Sigma Gamma 14. How is

that possible?' Vaughn persisted calmly.
'Your inquiry is redundant,' rasped the disembodied voice.
Vaughn's pale eyes gleamed. 'That is for me to decide.'
'You will obey.'
Vaughn stood his ground unflinchingly. 'Negative. I control the operation here

on Earth. Unless that is agreed our cooperation is at an end,' he declared in a voice
like cut glass.

The crystal at the heart of the machine revolved rapidly, emitting myriad points
of intense light. Eventually it stopped. 'It has been agreed,' it rasped.

Vaughn smiled bleakly. 'I felt sure that your masters would be reasonable,' he
purred. 'Now, how did this Doctor reach Planet Sigma Gamma 14?'

'He possesses a device.'
Vaughn's body tensed expectantly. 'What kind of device?' he demanded with

suppressed excitement.
The apparatus whirred and revolved. 'No further information available. The

Doctor will be eliminated. The invasion must proceed,' it decreed harshly, needles of
light shooting from the crystal.

Vaughn nodded decisively. 'Oh, it will. The Doctor will be taken care of. I shall
attend to it personally...'

With a vicious twist of the pen top, Vaughn banished the thing to the darkness
again behind the wall.

Totally mystified, Jamie had followed the Doctor through a maze of alleys and
back streets and finally up onto a railway embankment which snaked between
warehouses and office blocks.

The Doctor had skipped nimbly along the sleepers and led Jamie off on a single
track branch line which curved sharply round and finally brought them into a
marshalling yard enclosed by high walls at the rear of the International Electromatix
Building.

'This is a private branch line off the main line into Liverpool Street...' the Doctor
explained, darting across the rusting rails towards a line of freight wagons bearing the
familiar fist and lightning flash symbol of International Electromatix.

'But how did ye ken it was here?' Jamie panted.
'I consulted the Brigadier's excellent map,' smirked the Doctor, using the wagons

as cover to approach the extensive warehouse buildings at the back of the tower. 'I
memorised it to distract myself from the taste of his execrable tea.'

Following the line of wagons in the siding they soon reached a vast covered
loading bay adjoining the warehouse. It was filled with stacks of cylindrical metal
containers each about two and a half metres long by about a metre in diameter. Each



one had a short blunt projection at both ends and a specially shaped base to facilitate
vertical stacking.

Huddled against the coupling between two wagons, Jamie and the Doctor
watched in amazement as a man with crew-cut hair wearing a blue boiler suit emerged
from the warehouse carrying one of the containers as if it were a baby. He placed it
carefully on one of the stacks and then returned to the warehouse.

'Extraordinary!' marvelled the Doctor.
'Probably empty,' Jamie whispered.
'Let's find out,' the Doctor suggested eagerly.
Leaving their hiding place, they ran over to the stack and attempted to lift the

container. They failed even to budge it.
'Yon fellow must be a superman,' Jamie gasped.
The Doctor tried to raise the hinged lid, but it was securely fastened. 'I wonder

what's inside?' he mused. The sound of heavy footsteps sent them scurrying behind
a neighbouring stack, where they watched the same man bring an identical container
and add it to the pile.

Jamie's eyes were popping with astonishment. 'Let's find the lassies and get oot,'
he urged. 'That chap gives me the heebie-jeebies.'

When the man had gone, they crept between the endless stacks of crates
desperately seeking a likely route into the main building.

Unknown to them, robot cameras in the roof were tracking their every movement
and at the top of the tower block Tobias Vaughn was observing their progress on his
nine monitors, chuckling with urbane amusement.

All at once Packer's reedy voice whined out of the intercom on Vaughn's desk.
'Mr Vaughn, the Doctor and the boy are back again...

Surveillance spotted them in the warehouse.'
Vaughn laughed sarcastically. 'I wondered how long it would take your experts

to notice our intruders, Packer. They've been entertaining me for at least ten minutes.'
'I'll issue an alert, sir.'
Vaughn sighed despairingly. 'Packer, do try to aspire to a modicum of subtlety,'

he pleaded, wincing fastidiously. 'We need a sprat to catch our mackerel. Take the
young ladies down to the warehouse and pop them in their coffins.'

Smoothing back his sleek silver hair and adjusting the silk handkerchief in his
breast pocket, Vaughn strode across to his private elevator and selected Ground Floor
- Express. His keen mind considered the problem of the meddlesome Doctor and his
mysterious circuits as he glided earthwards.

When the elevator stopped, Vaughn had made his decision.

'This place is like a maze,' Jamie complained as he and the Doctor threaded their
way cautiously among the identical stacks, keeping their eyes skinned for any more
boiler-suited Hercules.

Suddenly they froze as two piercing screams echoed around the vast warehouse.
'Zoe and Isobel!' Jamie hissed, pointing back towards the loading bay.
Turning, they ran on tip-toe in the direction of themarshalling yard. Crouching in

the shadows between the stacks, they watched as Packer supervised two men loading
two containers into the last wagon of the train. Jamie gasped as he caught a glimpse



of a fluttering string of feathers trapped between the lid and the rim of one of the
metal cases.

'Doctor... Zoe's in that crate!' he exclaimed, standing upright with fists clenched
and pulse racing madly. 'Jamie, wait!' growled the Doctor, grabbing his arm.

But the impulsive boy shook himself free and sprinted towards the wagons
yelling at the top of his voice 'What have ye done with Zoe...!'

The Doctor chewed the frayed edge of his cravat in anguish as he saw Packer
whip round and snatch out a pistol as Jamie bore down on him. Springing into view,
he scampered in pursuit, shouting to Jamie to stop behaving like an idiot.

Two steel-helmeted guards armed with sten guns suddenly appeared between
the wagons and Jamie stumbled to a halt. Turning, he saw two more guards appear
behind the Doctor. It was hopeless.

The two friends stood side by side panting for breath as the four guards closed in
on them, slipping their safety catches. Packer's weak face lit up in cowardly triumph.
'Rats,' he hissed, strutting malevolently towards them. 'Rats in a trap.'

As the guards forced their captives back towards the warehouse, Packer exulted
in his victory. 'Don't you understand - this is private property, a restricted area,' he
whined.

'What have you done with Zoe and Isobel?' Jamie demanded savagely. 'We heard
them screaming.'

'Silence!' Packer snapped.
'We saw the box with...'
Packer lashed Jamie brutally across the face with his leather glove. 'I told you

to be quiet.'
The Doctor gasped with shock as Jamie staggered against him clutching his ear,

with blood seeping from his nose.
Before Packer could repeat the vicious blow, Vaughn's measured tones rang out.

'Packer, you really must try to curb this violent streak in your nature, though I admit
the situation is a trifle provoking.'

Flanked by two armed guards, the Director of International Electromatix strode
towards them, wagging his finger at the Doctor.

'You really are beginning to try our patience,' he chided menacingly.
The Doctor cleared his throat with undisguised distaste. 'We came to look for

two young friends of ours, Mr Vaughn.'
Vaughn nodded. 'Two young ladies.'
'You see,' Jamie exploded. 'He admits they're here.'
Vaughn shook his head regretfully. 'Correction. They were here. You appear to

have been chasing one another's tails. They came here in search of you.'
'And where are they now?' the Doctor inquired calmly.
'They departed.'
'Aye. In one of your tin coffins!' Jamie shouted.
Vaughn glanced scornfully at the Doctor. 'Really...' he protested.
'We did hear someone scream,' the Doctor quietly pointed out.
'And Zoe's boa is sticking out of one of the boxes,' Jamie persisted, wiping the

blood from his nose.
Vaughn threw hack his head and roaredwith laughter. 'What a fertile imagination

you have, young man,' he said tartly.



The Doctor placed a restraining hand on Jamie's shoulder. 'Mr Vaughn, it would
set our minds at rest if you would permit us to examine the boxes in the last wagon...
in case there has been an accident,' he ventured tactfully.

Vaughn spread his arms generously. 'But of course,' he agreed readily. He turned
to Packer who was sulking at having the limelight stolen from him. 'No doubt the
Doctor is referring to the empty crates in transit back to the factories,' he said, with a
significant sideways glance of his hooded eyes.

'Yes, Mr Vaughn. The train's due out any minute.'
'Then we must waste no more time,' Vaughn smiled. 'After you, Doctor.'
As Jamie and the Doctor eagerly set off back towards the marshalling yard,

Vaughn signalled secretly to Packer and then caught up with them.
Packer pulled back his left sleeve, exposing a miniaturised two-way radio no

bigger than a wristwatch. Pressing a tiny button, he whispered urgently into it.
'Traffic? Top priority. Get the return transit rolling at once. Do you hear me? Right
now.'

Just as the Doctor, Jamie and Vaughn reached the loading bay there was a sudden
clanking of couplings and the freight wagons slowly began to pull out of the siding.
Jamie started running after them but he was far too late. He gave up and stood staring
at the rapidly accelerating train with a sinking heart.

'What a pity,' Vaughn said consolingly. 'I am sorry.'
TheDoctor's browwas deeply furrowedwithmounting anxiety, but he attempted

a wry smile.
'However, all is not lost,' Vaughn went on brightly. 'I have to visit the factory

complex myself this afternoon. Would you two gentlemen care to accompany me?
We can meet the train there.'

Jamie glanced apprehensively at Packer and his security guards hovering at the
entrance to the warehouse. The Doctor squeezed his arm reassuringly and turned to
Vaughn. 'Most kind.

We'd be delighted to come.'
'Splendid,' Vaughn purred and led the way into the main building.

Brigadier Alistair Gordon Lethbridge-Stewart was sitting at his desk in the
Hercules Operations Room, straining to hear Benton's voice on the radiotelephone
above the whine of the mighty turboprops as the massive plane came in to land on
a disused RAF

station.
'How long ago did they go into the railway yard?' he repeated.
'About an hour ago, sir. Tracey followed them to the... Just a minute, sir...'
The Brigadier pressed the handset firmly to his ear and waited impatiently.

'Benton, what the devil's going on?' he demanded in clipped urgent tones.
'The Doctor and the boy have just come out of the main entrance, sir. Vaughn's

with them.'
'Vaughn!' echoed the Brigadier in surprise.
'And Packer, sir. They're getting into Vaughn's Rolls.'
The Brigadier stroked his neat moustache thoughtfully. 'Are they being

harrassed, Benton?'
'Doesn't look like it, sir...'



The Brigadier was roughly jolted about as the Hercules touched down and
coasted along the uneven concrete runway.

'Benton...' he shouted irritably.
'All looks quite friendly, sir. They're just being driven off now.
Shall we follow, sir?'
'Negative, Benton. Continue surveillance at your location.
Out.' Unlatching his seat belt, the Brigadier leaped to his. feet.
'Sergeant Walters, alert aerial patrol Section Three,' he instructed.
Then he turned to a tall, dark-haired young officer at the Situation Map. 'Captain

Turner, as soon as we're on blocks get aboard a chopper and rendezvous with Section
Three tracking agents,' he shouted above the engines as they revved at reverse pitch
to slow the heavy plane. 'We'll play it by ear for a bit so keep your nose out of trouble.'

'Yes, sir,' snapped Turner with a crisp salute. 'Should the Doctor contact us for
help I'll have him connected directly to you.'

Turner strode away towards the huge cargo bay at the rear, briskly snapping
instructions right and left.

The Brigadier studied the brightly coloured Situation Map for a long time,
occasionally breaking off to receive a report or to issue a string of orders to the widely
spread and versatile forces under his overall command.

At last Captain Turner came through, shouting above the din of the helicopter
engine on the radiotelephone. 'They've just gone through the IE Compound gates, sir.
They seem to be heading for the Factory Complex.'

The Brigadier's calm exterior betrayed a brief tremor of excitement. 'Circle the
area but keep out of sight, Jimmy,' he advised.

'If you're spotted it might make things worse for our two friends. We can't do
anything until we get a request for assistance.'

He signed off and took a sip of cold tea from his chipped mug.
'After all, this is all rather unofficial...' he murmured wryly to himself.
The Doctor remained silent during the short high-speed drive out of London,

his eyes fixed steadfastly on the disturbing International Electromatix symbol on the
pennant flying from the front wing of the enormous white Rolls Royce.

'The train with the empty containers will not arrive for some time,' Vaughn
informed him as they drew up in front of what appeared to be a smaller version of
the Company's City headquarters.

'Meanwhile, I'd rather like to talk to you about those fascinating circuits you left
with me.'

At the door of his private elevator in the foyer, Vaughn turned to his Deputy.
'Packer, be so good as to see what progress Professor Watkins is making,' he purred.
'You might even offer him a little gentle encouragement.' Then he ushered his visitors
up to the top floor.

As they walked into the spacious, functional office Jamie whistled in
astonishment. 'It's just like your London office,' he exclaimed.

Vaughn chuckled amiably. 'Confusing, isn't it?' He motioned them to sit down in
the stylish chairs facing his desk. 'It's the secret ofmy success, Doctor - standardisation
and uniformity.'

'Mass production,' remarked the Doctor with obvious distaste.



Jamie hovered by the huge window, staring down between the vertical louvres
at the complex of large factory buildings spread below. Steam and smoke rose
everywhere and a distant humming sounded constantly.

'The essence of efficiency, Doctor.' Vaughn said expansively.
The Doctor smiled blandly back at him, giving nothing away.
'I should be angry with you both,' Vaughn went on. 'You have thwarted my

security system twice. Why?'
The Doctor shrugged casually. 'It's quite simple, Mr Vaughn. I detest computers

and I refuse to be controlled by them.'
'Your young friend Zoe appears to feel the same. She completely destroyed one

of our reception installations.'
Jamie spun round. 'So that's why your bully boys got hold of her and Isobel,'

he blurted out.
Vaughn turned to him with an offended smile. 'My dear young man, on the

contrary I found the incident quite amusing. She's a remarkable girl,' he turned back
to the Doctor. 'And you, Doctor, are a remarkable man.'

The Doctor blushed. 'Why do you say that?' he inquired modestly.
Vaughn took the two circuit panels from the TARDIS from his inner pocket and

laid them on the desk. 'Our Research Department found these baffling. Their structure
seems totally illogical. Did you invent them yourself?'

The Doctor remained enigmatically silent.
Vaughn stood up, cleverly concealing his frustration. 'So you are determined to

preserve your secrets, Doctor. I can hardly blame you. We shall do all we can to help.'
The Doctor inclined his head. 'You're very kind.'
Vaughn walked over to his private elevator. 'Please make yourselves at home,'

he said graciously.'I will see if I can personally persuade Professor Watkins to divert
his talents to investigating your little problem.'

As soon as he had gone, Jamie rushed over to the Doctor.
'What aboot Zoe and Isobel?' he cried.
'Don't worry. I haven't forgotten them,' the Doctor assured him.
'Och, I know they were in those box things, Doctor.'
The Doctor held up his hands patiently. 'Jamie, we won't help the girls by

annoying Mr Vaughn,' he warned him.

'But he's being nice as pie to us.'
'Too nice, Jamie.' The Doctor picked up the circuits. 'And he's a little too

interested in these for my liking.'
Jamie's eyes widened. 'Do ye think he knows aboot the TARDIS, Doctor?' he

whispered.
'I don't see how he could.'
Jamie went back over to the panoramic window 'Och well, perhaps the Professor

will be able to tell us what's happening here.'
The Doctor bit his lip and sighed. 'That's what puzzles me, Jamie. If Vaughn has

anything to hide, why is he going to allow us to see Watkins?'

In a cluttered room in the basement below the building, Packer was lounging
against the wall staring with sneering contempt at a short stout balding man of about
sixty clad in baggy trousers, rolled-up shirtsleeves and an unbuttoned waistcoat. The



bearded little man gazed back at Packer with undisguised loathing through thick wire-
framed spectacles. Electronic circuitry and tangles of cable were scattered over a large
bench and even over the crude unmade bunk in one corner.

'She's a pretty girl, your niece,' Packer was saying casually.
'It'd be such a shame to spoil her.'
'You're a pathetic little sadist, Packer,' Professor Watkins retorted sadly. 'I don't

believe you anyway.'
Packer stepped towards him, eyes blazing. 'You know I don't make idle threats.

If you value the girl you'll do as Mr Vaughn wishes.'
Watkins snorted. 'Assuming you really have got Isobel, how do I know you

haven't harmed her already?'
At that moment Vaughn appeared in the doorway. 'You can take my word for

that, Professor,' he announced soothingly.
Watkins turned sharply, squinting through his pebble lenses.
'Your word!' he scoffed dismissively.
Vaughn strolled across to the bench and frowned at a complicated assemblage

of partially connected cathode tubes, transistors and coils almost buried within a web
of tiny coloured wires. 'So you still haven't completed the device...' he scolded
menacingly.

'No. I don't intend to complete it,' snapped Watkins.
Vaughn swung round on the trembling little figure. 'Oh, I think you will,

Professor,' he purred. 'Otherwise, much as I abhore violence, I might not he able to
restrain Packer's enthusiasm for persuasive hospitality. The choice is yours.'

Shaking with outrage, Watkins brazened it out for a few more seconds. Finally
he slumped meekly in defeat. 'You'll let the poor child go if I cooperate?' he muttered
faintly.

'No, no, no... She is our guarantee,' Vaughn protested indignantly. 'But she'll
come to no harm.'

Watkins blinked at his smiling tormentors in anguish. 'Very well,' he conceded
at last. But I want to see Isobel first.'

'Of course you do,' Vaughn agreed. 'However, one more thing.'
The Professor started suspiciously and retreated a few paces.
'Some friends of yours are here and they're determined to see you,' Vaughn

informed his victim.
Watkins frowned. 'Friends? I'm not allowed visitors,' he retorted. 'I might tell

them everything!'
Vaughn threw hack his distinguished head and laughed. 'You know nothing to

compromise me. Besides, Professor, don't forget Isobel.'
Packer thrust his pale perspiring face at Watkins. 'Because I certainly shan't

forget Isobel,' he threatened, baring his discoloured teeth.
The Professor hesitated for a moment, then bowing to the inevitable, he turned

reluctantly to his half-assembled apparatus and sighed, shaking his domed head in
distress.

Vaughn paused in the doorway. 'Conduct the Professor's visitors down to him,
Packer,' he ordered benignly and walked out.

In Vaughn's office, Jamie and the Doctor were at the window and Jamie was
pointing out a strange building he had noticed in the distance. The Doctor fished out



a small brass telescope and extended it. 'My goodness me!' he muttered, focussing on
the three large spheres mounted on the roof of a small windowless building on the far
side of the complex. 'It looks like a deep space communications installation, Jamie.'

'What's it doing here, Doctor?'
The Doctor shrugged. 'The plot thickens...' he murmured, studying the structure

carefully.
Suddenly Jamie pointed to a tiny black shape high above the distant woodland.

'A helicopter! Perhaps it's the Brigadier's mob,' he whispered.
Before the Doctor could refocus the telescope the door slid open and Packer

swaggered in. 'Come with me,' he snapped malevolently.
The Doctor turned and stared at him with raised eyebrows.
Packer stared back, thrilled at the prospect of trouble. But the Doctor's steadfast

gaze eventually disconcerted him and at last he got the message. 'Please, gentlemen...'
he added through clenched teeth.

With a brilliant smile, the Doctor led Jamie to the door.

As soon as he was alone with his visitors Professor Watkins seemed to conquer
his profound suspicion and to relax a little. 'Of course... Anne Travers told me all
about you, Doctor,' he beamed.

'She was a brilliant student.'
'Indeed. They're in America now, I believe,' replied the Doctor, his eyes shifting

surreptitiously around the jumbled room while they chatted.
'But what are you doing here?' Watkins inquired brightly.
The Doctor coughed and blew his nose loudly. 'That's rather a long story.' he

murmured confidentially. 'But the fact is, I need help with some faulty circuits out
of the TARDIS.'

Watkins looked puzzled. Then he nodded and smiled.
'Ah yes... your machine. I remember Anne's description was most intriguing. I'd

like to hear more...'
Again the Doctor coughed and then blew his nose violently. 'I fear Miss Travers

may have allowed her imagination to run rather wild,' he replied, weaving his way
through the disorder towards the Professor's bunk.

Watkins's eager face cloudedwith disappointment. 'Youmean the travel machine
doesn't exist?' he cried.

'Och, of course it does,' Jamie burst out, 'we landed in it this morning not far
from...'

His words were muffled by a prolonged fit of wheezing and coughing from the
Doctor who was now perched on the bunk facing them and shooting significant
glances towards a small ventilator grille set into the wall.

Then Jamie noticed something glinting in one corner of the grille. 'Och... Aye...'
he mumbled shamefacedly, turning to the Professor and mouthing a frantic warning.

Professor Watkins glanced from one to the other, utterly confused by their
extraordinary antics. 'Are you all right?' he ventured kindly.

'Never felt better!' the Doctor laughed, starting to rummage feverishly in his
many bulging pockets. 'Tell us something about your important work here, Professor,'
he suggested with exaggerated enthusiasm.



'My work?' Watkins echoed with flattered delight. 'Oh, it's really just a new kind
of teaching aid...'

The Doctor nodded energetically, grimacing as if to encourage Watkins to keep
talking regardless.

At last the Professor's feeble eyesight made out the miniature television camera
lens fitted inside the grille. 'It's... it's called a Cerebration Mentor,' he burbled on. 'It
is able to transmit encoded thought patterns directly into the brain... However the
device can also induce emotional changes in the subject and therefore make it more
susceptible to rapid learning...'

At that moment the Doctor found what he wanted. It was a small but exceedingly
powerful magnet. 'Most ingenious, Professor,'

he exclaimed, reaching up and attaching the magnet to the grille right next to the
lens. 'But not foolproof, I'm afraid!'

Tobias Vaughn's faintly amused smile abruptly vanished as the image on the
monitor broke up, flashed violently and disappeared.

'Check the system,' he snapped.
Packer hastily pressed several buttons on the Director's desk.
At once the other eight video screens all showed clear, slowly scanning views

of various sections of the complex.

Vaughn turned sharply away from the bank of screens, flushing with pent up
frustration. 'Our friend, the Doctor, is a resourceful man. No wonder our allies fear
him,' he grunted, staring across at the blank wall.

Packer's scalp crept visibly in surprise. 'They know him?'
'They encountered him on another planet.'
Packer's small but prominent eyeballs bulged. 'That's impossible.'
'No, Packer. The Doctor operates some kind of travel device.
The barbarian Scottish youth confirmed it a moment ago. Our allies ordered me

to destroy the Doctor, but first I must discover the secrets of this extraordinary
machine.'

Packer's face suddenly betrayed a deeply rooted unease. He licked his thin lips
nervously. 'But if you were ordered to...

Vaughn thumped the desk decisively. 'I don't take orders, Packer, I give them,'
he shouted, striding across to the elevator. 'The time has come to stop playing cat and
mouse with the Doctor and his friends.'

4



Hitching Lifts

Professor Watkins shuffled slowly round his basement prison wringing his
gnarled hands in desperation. 'If Vaughn has your young friend Zoe as well as Isobel
then we are completely at his mercy,' he submitted.

'Not entirely. There is still the Brigadier remember,' the Doctor pointed out. 'But
quickly, Professor, we have little time. What do you know about Vaughn's activities?
What's he up to here?'

Watkins fluttered his hands helplessly. 'I know no more than you do Doctor,
except that he wants control of my invention to add to his electronics empire.'

The Doctor sighed. 'I've a nasty feeling he's aiming a lot higher than that, my
clear fellow.'

'Someone's coming!' Jamie warned them, retreating from the door where he'd
been keeping watch.

The Doctor hurried across to the ventilator and was just about to remove his
magnet from the grille when Vaughn strode in with Packer sneering at his elbow.

'Please don't trouble yourself, Doctor... allow me,' Vaughn smiled, going over
and removing themagnet. He held the tiny object aloft like a trophy. 'Most ingenious...
but alas not foolproof,' he joked.

The Doctor bowed, acknowledging the irony of the situation.
Vaughn's bland manner abruptly changed, becoming cold and undisguised. 'You

must realise that you force me to consider other methods of obtaining the information
I want.'

Inwardly boiling with resentment and rage, the Doctor remained silent and
impassive. Jamie's fists clenched and unclenched behind his back.

'Your friend Zoe will arrive here shortly...' Vaughn began.
'So you have got the lassie,' Jamie shouted, barging forward. 'If ye've harmed

her...'

Vaughn waved him away disdainfully. 'Doctor, I want your travel machine,' he
announced curtly. 'Either you hand it over to me or Packer will be obliged to introduce
Miss Zoe to his rather crude form of hospitality. You have exactly sixty minutes to
decide.

Packer!'
The gleam of anticipation shone in Packer's beady eyes as he drew his pistol and

motioned the Doctor and Jamie towards the door.
The Doctor grasped Jamie firmly by the arm and guided him to obey.
As Packer marched them outside, Vaughn wandered over to the cowering figure

by the bench. 'No more interruptions, Professor,'
he promised, with a bleak smile. 'And now I suggest that you continue with your

vital work.'
Under Vaughn's pale gaze, Watkins picked up a soldering probe and bowed half-

heartedly over his apparatus to resume his thankless task with trembling hands.

Meanwhile, Packer escorted his prisoners to the main elevator shaft and
summoned the lift. As they waited, the Doctor stared up at the indicator and suddenly
shivered.



'What's wrong?' asked Jamie.
'Just my little phobia about lifts,' the Doctor shrugged, grinning wanly at Packer.

Then he turned to Jamie and swivelled his eyes and contorted his eyebrows in a brief
pantomime of signals.

After a baffled pause Jamie nodded furiously. 'Och aye, Doctor... Yer wee
phobia?' he murmured sympathetically.

As the lift arrived and the doors slid open the Doctor suddenly turned to Packer
and gave a hopeless shrug. 'It's no good Mr Packer, I can't bear to let Zoe suffer,' he
admitted. 'I'd better tell you what you want to know.'

Packer's bloodless mouth compressed with suspicion and he raised his gun.
'You're willing to talk?' he demanded, sensing his opportunity to redeem himself in
Vaughn's estimation.

The Doctor nodded, nudging Jamie to enter the lift. 'Actually I'd rather tell you
everything...' he continued, frantically gesturing to Jamie behind his back. 'I find Mr
Vaughn rather...' The Doctor stared deliberately over Packer's shoulder. 'Too late.
Here he comes now,'

he muttered, hacking into the lift as Packer turned to look down the empty
corridor.

Meanwhile Jamie had pressed a button and the doors started to close before
Packer could turn hack to them. The Doctor just managed to wriggle between the
doors in time. They snapped together and the lift began to ascend.

'Quick, give me your dirk,' he cried.
Jamie reached into his sock and drew out a short, wicked-looking dagger.

Snatching it eagerly the Doctor prised the faceplate off the control panel and yanked
out a handful of wires.

'What are ye doing?' Jamie gasped in alarm.
The Doctor gave the bundle of wires a sharp tug. 'We shall either stop or crash

back down the shaft,' he announced impassively.
Jamie glanced at the floor indicator. 'But we're six floors up!'
he shrieked.
'Then hold tight,' muttered the Doctor, tugging again.
There was a short burst of sparks and a few wisps of black smoke from the panel

and the lift whined to a halt. They held their breaths. Suddenly there was a scream of
distant gears and the lift dropped several metres before jerking to a stop again.

White-faced and sweating they picked themselves up off the floor. Jamie gazed
in disbelief as the Doctor gingerly bounced up and down a few times. To their relief
the lift stayed put.

The Doctor grinned. 'It was a fifty-fifty chance, Jamie, but we're safe,' he said
smugly.

'We're not. We're stuck five floors up!' Jamie protested heatedly, snatching back
his dirk and shoving it down his sock.

The Doctor smiled patiently. 'Jamie, the lift is stuck, not us,' he retorted, pointing
up at the small trapdoor in the ceiling above them.

'Come on, up you go.'
TheDoctor touched his toes and Jamie clambered reluctantly onto his back. 'Och,

ye're a clever wee chap,' he admitted grudgingly, pushing open the trapdoor.



'Thank you, Jamie,' came the Doctor's muffled response, 'and you're a brave wee
chap, so you can go first.'

A few minutes later Jamie had heaved the Doctor up through the hatchway and
they crouched on the roof of the lift, gazing apprehensively up the long shaft where
the greasy cables disappeared into the darkness.

The Doctor tested the narrow steel ladder clamped to the wall of the shaft. 'It's
a long climb, Jamie, but with luck we'll reach the top before they realise what's
happened.'

Something scribbled in the thick layer of dust on the lift roof caught his eye.
'Who's Kilroy?' he wondered absently.

Jamie grinned and wiped his finger. 'Och, nobody you'd know.
Come on, Doctor.'
With Jamie leading the way they started to climb the vertical ladder, their

laboured efforts causing eerie echoes in the tall dark shaft.
'Doctor, what happens if... if they get the lift working again before... we reach

the top?' panted Jamie after a while.
The Doctor grunted breathlessly. 'Quite simple, Jamie. We get squashed...'
Jamie smiled grimly to himself at the epitaph they had left below them in the

dust... KILROY WAS HERE.

Vaughn stood by the elevator doors shaking his head incredulously.
'I'll kill them...' spluttered Packer, his hand over the mouthpiece of the service

telephone.
'You'll do no such thing,' Vaughn snapped. 'I want them alive.'
'What the hell happened?' Packer yelled down the phone.
'Well, use the emergency circuits, man,' he ordered, slamming the receiver

clown. 'The thing's stuck between the fourth and fifth floors.'
'So I gathered, Packer,' murmured Vaughn ominously. 'Our clever Doctor has

outwitted you once again.'
Packer's cruel mouth twitched and curled with hatred. 'Well, now he's been a hit

too clever. He's trapped,' he sneered.
Vaughn's face darkened. 'I don't understand his motive,' he pondered, 'Unless

he's just playing for time.'

Packer seized the receiver and punched a few digits with his gloved knuckle.
'Packer. Cover all lift doors. Two men on each floor.

Now. Move,' he rapped.
Vaughn shaded his eyes, his sensibilities offended by his Deputy's hysterical

behaviour. 'Calm clown, Packer, our birds can't fly away,' he protested quietly.
They waited, Vaughn expressionless and unblinking, Packer tense and

fidgetting. Eventually the service telephone buzzed. Packer answered.
'Right. Send it down to the basement,' he instructed.
Two armed and visored security guards came clattering down the concrete

emergency stairs next to the elevator shaft just as the indicator light lit up. They
levelled their machine pistols as the lift doors opened.



Packer stared open-mouthed into the empty car. 'They've vanished... just
vanished!' he whined. 'Did it stop anywhere on the way down?' he rapped into the
telephone. 'No? You sure?' he demanded shrilly.

'Come here, Packer,' Vaughn called wearily from inside the lift.
Dry-throated and sweating, Packer obeyed. Vaughnwas pointing to the trapdoor.

Packer's eyes narrowed to slits of glittering malice.
'I'll get them, sir... I'll get them,' Packer vowed, dabbing his cheese-coloured

forehead with his sleeve.
'Call mewhen you do. I'll he inmy office,' Vaughn ordered, walking despairingly

out of the lift. 'And try not to lose them...'
Smarting from his master's sarcastic taunt in front of the two guards, Packer

pulled back his cuff and viciously spat orders into his miniature radio. 'Packer. They're
in the shaft. Get men onto the roof immediately.' He hesitated a moment, his nose
slowly puckering into a sneer of malicious anticipation. 'And tell the engineer to take
the lift right to the top. Now!' he added, beckoning the two guards into the car with
him.

Furiously clambering up through the dusty, greasy darkness, Jamie and the
Doctor desperately redoubled their efforts when they heard the terrifying clanks and
whirrings as the lift became operational again and the cables started whipping and
clattering only a few centimetres away from them. Above them the electric motor
whined inexorably and below them the grinding of wheels and the shrieking of
bearings rose relentlessly towards them.

'Quick, Jamie... Quick...' the Doctor gasped feebly from the rickety ladder
beneath him. 'It's catching us up.'

At last Jamie reached the metal gantry supporting the winding gear.
'McCrimmons for ever...' he whooped, wrenching open the steel door in the concrete
housing and bursting onto the flat roof. The Doctor struggled out after him and they
lay on their backs for a few seconds, gratefully gulping the cool fresh air. Suddenly
the harsh whining ceased abruptly and there was a final numbing clang as the lift hit
its buffer-stops, sending a red-hot shiver through their exhausted bodies.

Then the Doctor jumped up. 'Come on, Jamie,' he panted, stumbling across to
the parapet and looking over the edge at the dizzying drop below.

'Och, just a wee minute...' Jamie pleaded, moaning with fatigue.
'No time to lose,' yelled the Doctor, climbing over the parapet and disappearing.
Jamie sat bolt upright, a stifled scream blocking his throat.
Dumb with horror, he limped across the roof, scarcely daring to look down. To

his relief he saw that the Doctor was running down a fire-escape fitted in the angle
of the L-shaped building.

'Come on, Jamie, they'll be up there any minute.'
Jamie shut his eyes and dragged himself over the parapet. As he started slithering

down the metal staircase a blood-curdling chorus of howling sirens broke out all
around the complex...

Packer stood dejectedly in front of Vaughn's desk, his uniform torn and his face
streaked with dirt. 'They must have gone down the fire escape, sir...' he mumbled,
concluding his pathetic report.



Vaughn shook his head very, very slowly, rising to his feet and gazing out over
his empire spread before him. Suddenly he punched a fist into his open palm and
rounded on his Deputy. 'I want the Doctor and the boy,' he said in an awful, hushed
voice.

There was silence. Then Packer swallowed. 'The whole compound's on alert, sir.
It's only a matter of time.' Vaughn uttered a short derisive laugh.

Packer's bottled up frustration suddenly erupted. 'You should have let me deal
with them properly right at the start,' he snarled accusingly. 'And if you'd only obey
our allies' orders...'

'Orders, Packer?' Vaughn echoed, moving up to him. 'I told you before; I don't
obey orders, I give them.'

Packer stared at him like a mesmerised animal. 'But you can't fight them!' he
spluttered.

Vaughn smiled blandly. 'The invasion will be under my control and when it is
successfully accomplished I shall remain supreme,' he declared confidently. 'Why do
you suppose I keep that senile old fool Watkins alive?'

'To work on his machine.'
'Our allies are extremely disturbed by the Professor's machine,'
Vaughn revealed. 'They ordered me to destroy the prototype.'
Packer gazed at his Director in astonishment. 'They are afraid of it?'
'Oh, its teaching function doesn't worry them, but when we generated some

emotion pulses...' Vaughn paused dramatically, savouring Packer's bewilderment. 'I
am convinced that the emotional pulses could be used to destroy our allies,' he
concluded.

Packer looked thoroughly rattled. 'That's just a guess,' he muttered.
Vaughn shook his head slyly. 'No, it's a reasonable gamble,' he argued, 'and we're

playing for very high stakes, are we not?'
Packer licked his tacky lips. 'You're taking too big a chance,'
he croaked.
Vaughn moved even closer to him, his pale eyes boring like lasers. 'Do you

want to be totally converted, Packer?' he whispered hoarsely. 'Do you want to become
inhuman? One of them?'

Packer tried to step back but his legs were like jelly.

Vaughn pursued his fear relentlessly. 'That's what will happen to us if they take
over.We shall cease to be human. However, we canmake use of their force to conquer
the world and then discard them at our leisure,' he proposed, as casually as if he were
describing a parlour game.

After a pause Packer grinned faintly. 'You're sure Watkins's device can do it?'
Vaughn shrugged indifferently. 'If we obtain the Doctor's travel machine we can

escape if necessary.'
'Insurance?'
'Precisely, Packer,' Vaughn grinned, patting his arm. 'And speaking of insurance,

have the two girls arrived?'
Packer informed him that they should be on their way over to the Administration

Building.
'Excellent,' Vaughn approved. 'When they are safely tucked away we shall flush

out our clever Doctor.'



All at once a high-pitched bleeping sounded from Packer's wrist. He held the
minute radio to his ear. As he listened, his face quickly twisted with apprehension
and anger.

'There's an unidentified helicopter in the area and Perimeter Security report
strangers sighted near the compound,' he informed his master, shifting uneasily in
anticipation of Vaughn's reaction. 'I think the Doctor may be connected to the UNIT
organisation. What are we going to do, sir?'

Vaughn went to the window and scanned the skies. 'Nothing,'
he snapped.
Packer was astounded. 'Nothing at all, sir?'
'They cannot hurt us, Packer,' Vaughn assured him in an almost unnatural voice.

'Just leave this to me...'

Thanks to their memory of the layout of the complex seen from Vaughn's office
window, Jamie and the Doctor managed to reach the railway sidings very quickly
without being spotted. They shut themselves inside a freight wagon and flopped down
between the containers to recover their breath. All around them sirens droned their
eerie alert and they soon heard the tramping of boots outside as Packet's men searched
the yard.

'D'ye think this could be the train Zoe and Isobel were on?'
Jamie whispered.
The Doctor considered a moment. 'If it is then these crates should be empty,

Jamie.'
Jamie knelt up. 'Soon see,' he grunted, heaving at the lid of the nearest container.

Slowly it swung open. He could just distinguish a bulky outline in a kind of plastic
material surrounded by dense cobweb filaments, like a cocoon lying in the darkness.
'Och, these are full,' he said, disappointed.

The Doctor crawled over and peered into the crate. His face went rigid and he
bit his lip uncertainly. 'I wonder what it is...'

Sudden voices outside silenced him. 'Search these wagons!'
someone shouted and they heard the ominous sound of wagon doors opening.
'Quick, Jamie, hide,' warned the Doctor, jamming himself into a tiny niche

between the stacks of containers. Jamie searched around feverishly for somewhere
for himself. All at once the handle of the door was wrenched back and the heavy door
started to slide open. In sheer desperation Jamie clambered into the open container and
pulled down the lid in the nick of time. There was just room for him squeezed betwen
the lid and the strange object underneath. He lay motionless, scracely breathing while
the guards searched the wagon.

Suddenly he felt a slight movement beneath him and heard a faint brittle rustling,
like dead leaves in a breeze. Instantly a clammy cold sweat broke out all over his body
and tiny hot needles seemed to prick his neck and scalp. He fought to stifle a scream
of terror and the urge to jump out of the crate. In the end he hardly knew whether it
was his own quaking or something else that was really moving underneath him. The
nightmare seemed eternal, but eventually he heard the wagon door slide shut and all
was quiet again.

The Doctor crept out and opened the lid.
'Doctor..



'Ssssh, Jamie, the guards are still outside.'
Jamie climbed out, his teeth chattering with fright. 'That thing in there... it

moved!' he whispered.
The Doctor stared at the cocoon thing and shook his head.
'Imagination. Jamie. Darkness plays strange tricks.'

'But I felt it, Doctor.'
The Doctor looked sceptical. 'Are you sure? Then we'd better take a look.'
At that moment there was a commotion outside. 'Sangster and Graves, get those

girls over to Administration pronto...' someone shouted.
'The lassies!' Jamie hissed, forgetting the horror of the last few minutes and

making for the door.
The Doctor grabbed his sleeve. 'Wait. Jamie. Let things quieten down out there,

then we'll go and find them.'
Reluctantly Jamie obeyed, but his blood was up and his blue eyes sparkled with

aggressive determination.
As soon as the guards had gone, they emerged cautiously from the freight wagon

and then sprinted hell-for-leather along the narrow alleyways between the huge
factory buildings towards the Administration Block. The sirens had stopped wailing,
but they had to dodge and dive for cover whenever patrols or personnel appeared.

Eventually they rounded a corner of the generating plant and flattened
themselves behind an empty skip to watch Packer supervising the opening of two
containers which had just been deposited on the steps of the entrance to the
Administration Building by a small forklift truck.

Zoe and Isobel were hauled roughly out of the crates and bundled through the
glass doors at the base of the tower. Jamie and the Doctor just managed to overhear
Packer order the girls to he taken up to the tenth floor. While the Doctor twiddled
his thumbs with profound concentration, working out a way to get to the prisoners,
Jamie screwed up his eyes and watched a helicopter chattering across the sky some
distance away from the complex.

'Must be some of the Brigadier's mob, Doctor. Let's call him up,' he suggested
impatiently.

But the Doctor said that it was too soon for that. First they must rescue Zoe and
Isobel. And as soon as the coast was clear, he led Jamie in a desperate sprint across the
open concrete yard and round to the back of the tower. 'Sorry, Jarnie, but I'm afraid I
abhor lifts...' he grinned, leading the way hack up the fire-escape in the angle between
the tower and the adjoining buildings.

Gritting his teeth, Jarnie scowled and clambered reluctantly up the metal spiral
behind him.

Inside the busy, cramped Operations Room, Lethbridge-Stewart stirred a fresh
mug of tea as he listened intently to Captain Turner's muffled report from the
helicopter.

'Lot of unusual activity down in the compound, sir. Looks like some kind of alert.'
'Any sign of the Doctor and the boy?'
'None, sir.'
The Brigadier nibbled thoughtfully at a digestive biscuit.



'Right, Jimmy. Pull out and stand by,' he ordered crisply.
He swung round in his chair and studied the Situation Map for a few minutes,

tugging the ends of his moustache. 'All units please,'
he requested.
The Signals Sergeant flicked a bank of switches. 'Go ahead, sir.'
The Brigadier picked up his handset. 'Lethbridge-Stewart to all Red units.

Penetration of Red Sector imminent. Report readiness.'
He dunked the remains of the biscuit impatiently while he waited for the situation

reports. It fell apart and floated on the top.
'Red Victor One mustering to standby. Ten minutes, sir... Red Victor Two

standing by, sir... Red Victor Three...'
As the brisk responses buzzed in his ear the Brigadier picked up his beret,

breathed on the UNIT badge and proudly polished it against his chest. 'Right, Doctor.
We're ready when you are,' he murmured.

At that moment, the Doctor was leading Jamie precariously along a narrow ledge
leading from one of the landings on the fire-escape to a vertical maintenance ladder
which ran up the side of the connecting building, linking the step-like series of flat
roofs at the rear of the Administration Building. They shinned recklessly up the
shuddering rungs to the first roof and dropped down behind the parapet to rest a
moment.

'That'll be the tenth floor up there,' gasped the Doctor, pointing to the sheer wall
of glass rising like a cliff above the next roof.

Jamie craned upwards unenthusiastically. 'Aye, but how do we ken which room
they're in?' he objected. 'And how do we get them out?'

'Stop looking for problems,' the Doctor snapped. 'Let's just get up there first,
Jamie.' He scurried across the asphalt and started scrambling up the vertical ladder
to the next storey.

Just as Jamie followed suit, Vaughn's eerily calm voice suddenly blared out from
huge tannoy speakers fixed to the corners of the tower building above them:

'Wherever you are, Doctor, listen carefully. You have just ten minutes to
relinquish your freedom. Ten minutes from now your friend Zoe will pay for your
foolish lack of cooperation..

Clinging unsteadily to the creaking ladder, they listened to the cold mechanical
threat echoing around the complex.

'Not much time,' muttered Jamie gloomily, staring up at the inaccessible identical
windows.

'Oh, time enough to effect a simple rescue operation,' replied the Doctor with
airy confidence. 'Come on, Jamie.'

Seconds later they reached the second roof and Jamie suddenly grabbed the
Doctor's arm and pointed upwards. 'Somebody's there.

It's Zoe!' he cried excitedly.
While Jamie started waving frantically to attract the attention of the vague figure

behind the reflective glass ten or so metres above them, the Doctor took out the
polyvox unit the Brigadier had given him, deployed the stubby aerial and pressed the
call button. 'Jamie, try to tell Zoe to keep away from the window, otherwise she'll give
the game away,' he muttered urgently. 'And keep down.'



'Hallo Doctor, come in...' buzzed the Brigadier.
'Brigadier, I think we shall require your assistance in a fewminutes. Do you have

a helicopter in the vicinity?' said the Doctor hurriedly.
'We do indeed, Doctor.'
'Equipped with a rope ladder of some kind?' 'Naturally, Doctor.
I'll order Captain Turner to find you immediately.'
The Doctor glanced up at the roof of the Administration Building a dozen storeys

above them. 'We'll be on the roof of the tower block, Brigadier. North East corner.
That should give your helicopter cover from any ground fire.'

'Excellent,' crackled the Brigadier appreciatively. 'Over and out.'
'Oh yes... Out and... and about,' the Doctor signed off, trying to hide his uneasy

expression from Jamie as he stared at the thin metal ladder running up the side of the
tower. 'And all in one piece too, I trust!'

Zoe had been staring clown at the grey concrete and metal buildings which
formed the International Electromatix Factory Complex with an expression of
hopeless gloom. 'I'm sorry, Isobel, this is all my fault,' she muttered. 'If I hadn't blown
up that stupid computer...'

Isobel still looked shocked after the ordeal inside the containers. 'Why didn't they
just turn us over to the fuzz or something, Zoe?' she wondered. 'It was horrible inside
those crate things. Why have they kidnapped us like this?'

Zoe shrugged. 'I don't see any way out of here, Isobel. It's a sheer drop,' she said,
turning to look round the bare featureless office where they were imprisoned. 'There's
nothing to make any sort of ladder with either.'

'Or a set of wings,' Isobel joked with a brave smile, pressing her pale face to the
window. Suddenly she caught sight of Jamie waving frantically directly below them.
'Zoe, look, it's Jamie and the Doctor!' she cried, clapping her hands with delight.

Zoe peered down, trying to interpret Jamie's wild gestures. 'I think Jamie's telling
us to keep away from the window, Isobel.'

Jamie was pointing to his eyes and then to the window and then doing an obscure
little mime.

The two girls glanced at each other in bewilderment. Then Zoe noticed that what
appeared to be a spotlight bulb suspended from the ceiling was in fact a rotatable
electronic eye.

'Just act as if nothing was happening...' she murmured out of the side of her
mouth. 'I think Big Brother is watching us.'

They moved away from the window with affected casualness and sat down
against the wall, as if giving up all thought of resistance. But inside, they were tense
with excitement and expectation.

Vaughn pressed a button on his desk and leaned towards the slim microphone.
'Doctor, you have just five minutes left,' he announced in an expressionless monotone.
'Do you hear me, Doctor?

Five minutes...'
Packer stood at the window, listening to his miniature VHF
unit and scanning the sky over the complex. 'They won't give themselves up, Mr

Vaughn. They'd be mad to,' he whined.



'Not mad, Packer. Merely human,' Vaughn retorted mildly, selecting a different
channel on one of the video screens in the wall opposite him. 'They won't want their
charming little friends to come to any harm.'

On the screen, Zoe and Isobel appeared sitting in disconsolate silence on the floor
of their room. Packer turned and gazed at them, his lip curling in a cruel sadistic sneer.

The sudden clattering whine of a helicopter made Packer spin round to the
window again. 'The helicopter, Mr Vaughn. It's right overhead!' he warned.

For a fleeting moment Vaughn looked slightly uneasy. He came to the window
and looked up at the helicopter as it passed out of sight, hovering directly over the
tower block. Then he looked back at the girls slumped in their prison. 'Perhaps the
Doctor and the boy plan to save their own skins and to desert the young ladies,' he
speculated. 'How very ungallant of them. No doubt the helicopter is manoeuvering to
pick them up. Stop them, Packer. Shoot the machine down if necessary.'

Packer's eyes lit up. 'Yes, Mr Vaughn!' he rapped and he hurried out of the office.
Vaughn reclined in his chair, observing the girls on the screens for a moment.

Then he leaned forward and pressed the tannoy button.
'Two minutes, Doctor,' he murmured. 'Two minutes...'

Jamie was tempted to wrench the cables out of the speakers as he and the Doctor
clambered over the parapet and onto the roof of the tower block with Vaughn's
deafening warning ringing in their ears. He watched the Doctor signalling to Captain
Turner to lower the rope ladder from the hovering helicopter.

'Surely you're not going to leave the lassies behind!' he shouted above the din of
the rotors, as the end of the ladder came snaking down.

'Don't be an imbecile, Jamie,' the Doctor yelled back irritably, catching the
swaying rungs and throwing them over the parapet on the side of the tower where Zoe
and Isobel were confined. He leaned over to check the length as Turner paid out the
ladder from the helicopter. 'Good,' he muttered, signalling to Turner to stop lowering.

'Now Jamie, down you go.'
The beefy young Scot stared at him and then shuddered dizzily as he looked over

the edge at the end of the ladder snapping to and fro in the stiff breeze. 'What? Me?
Climb down there...?' he expostulated, backing away from the parapet.

'Surely you're not going to leave the lassies here?' the Doctor shouted
sarcastically, punching Jamie's muscular arm.

Glaring resentfully, Jamie set his jaw, took a deep breath and hauled himself
onto the violently swinging ladder and out over the parapet. As he began the long,
terrifying climb down the lurching rungs, the banshee chorus of sirens struck up again,
wailing the alert all over the compound.

Eventually Jamie reached the tenth floor and kicked himself sideways to align
with the window where he had spotted Zoe.

The girls visibly jumped, screaming with fright as Jamie's heavy boots crashed
against the glass. Zoe leaped to her feet and managed to force open one side of the
window after a struggle.

'Come on, lassie, hurry yerself!' Jamie cried, squeezing himself through the gap
and jumping into the room with the end of the ladder.

Isobel's delight at seeing him turned to queasy doubt. 'You...
you don't expect us to climb up that, do you?' she exclaimed.



Jamie looked daggers at the pouting, countyish girl. 'Och, ye're quite welcome
to stay here wi' Mr Packer,' he retorted indignantly.

Zoe gave Jamie a quick grateful hug. 'No, thanks,' she said firmly. 'Come on,
Isobel.'

'Zoe first, then Isobel and me last,' Jamie commanded, steadying the ladder as
Zoe obediently clambered on and started to climb confidently upwards. 'And dinna
look down whatever ye do,'

he added, lifting the trembling Isobel onto the ladder with his free hand.
To Zoe and Isobel it seemed to take forever to reach the parapet where the Doctor

was anxiously waiting for them under the threshing blades of the helicopter. Just as
Zoe scrambled safely onto the roof a fusillade of machine pistol fire zipped up the side
of the Administration Building from the main entrance far below, smashing several
windows around Isobel. Jamie struggled desperately up the ladder behind her,
shouting encouragement as bullets whizzed against the concrete and glass all around
him. On the steps at the front of the building, Packer was screaming orders and
gesticulating like a maniac up at his escaping quarry.

At last Isobel and Jamie were dragged unscathed over the parapet by Zoe and
the Doctor.

'Thank goodness that's over...' gasped Isobel, ashen-faced.
'I'm afraid it isn't quite yet,' the Doctor shouted, pointing at the second length

of ladder leading up at an angle to the helicopter hovering over the opposite corner
of the rooftop.

Isobel shook her head in despair. 'I'm sorry. I don't think I can,'
she panted.
Jamie put a comforting arm round her and squeezed. 'Course ye can, lassie.'
At that moment, a shower of lethal concrete splinters suddenly exploded out of

the edge of the parapet, sending them all diving flat on their faces as Packer's men
fired a last futile salvo at the roof.

Then Packer ordered his men onto the roof and stormed after them, seething with
rage and frustration at his continuing failures.

With urgent persuasiveness, the Doctor, Zoc and Jamie finally got Isobel back
onto the ladder. Zoe followed her, then the Doctor and finally Jamie. The ladder
creaked and stretched under their combined weight and the rocking of the helicopter
sent the fugitives gyrating in all directions.

Below them, Packer and his men were racing up the fire escape and as soon
as they came within sight of the UNIT helicopter, they spread out over the flat roof
immediately below the tower and concentrated their fire.

Safe in the helicopter, the Doctor, Zoe and Isobel yelled encouragement to Jamie
as he forced himself up the last few rungs of the crazily whipping ladder with bullets
sizzling past him. Four pairs of hands hauled him into the cabin and the pilot banked
steeply and climbed rapidly away westwards and out of range.

5



Skeletons in Cupboards

Packer stood bowed and defeated in Vaughn's office, his lank hair sticking in
long black strands across his sweating forehead.

'I told you so. That chopper was from the UNIT outfit. I told you...' he persisted
accusingly.

His master was moving briskly around his desk, checking printouts and
consulting telex messages.

'Oh, do stop panicking, Packer,' Vaughn purred wearily. 'Your incompetence
defies description, but fortunately it no longer matters.'

Packer thumped the desk with both clenched fists. 'But there'll be an official
reaction now that lot are involved,' he whined anxiously.

Vaughn clicked his tongue and shook his head. 'There will be no official reaction,
Packer. I am fully in control of the situation, which is more than I can say for you.'

Packer muttered darkly to himself like a chided schoolboy.
'Don't argue:' Vaughn rapped. 'I wantWatkins's CerebrationMachine loaded into

the car immediately. We're going back to London.'
Packer stared at him aghast and started to object ineffectually.
Vaughn leaned forward on the desk and thrust his impassive face a few

centimetres from his Deputy's pallid mask. 'Thanks to your bungling I shall be obliged
to bring the invasion forward,' he murmured menacingly. 'We have just twenty-four
hours to prepare.'

Packer looked appalled. Then he laughed derisively.
'Twenty-four hours? They'll never agree to that. The invasion forces are nowhere

near complete...'
Vaughn silenced himwith a curt nod. 'The forces are sufficient for our immediate

purpose,' he hissed. 'You will attend to the machine and then bring Watkins up here
to me. Meanwhile I shall attend to our UNIT friends.'

Packer opened his weak mouth to object, but the diamond glint in Vaughn's pale
eye silenced him. Cowed, he turned on his heel and strode out with as much dignity
as he could muster.

As soon as he was alone, Vaughn punched a private code into the keyboard of
the small videophone in front of him. Seconds later, a smart young woman appeared
on the screen.

'Good afternoon, Ministry of Defence.'
'Good afternoon, my dear. Major-General Routledge, please,'
Vaughn requested pleasantly. 'My name is Tobias Vaughn.'

In the bowels of the vast Ministry of Defence building in Whitehall, Major-
General Routledge sat in his cheerless, darkened office in front of an ornate marble
fireplace with sporting trophies lining the mantelpiece. He was a thickset, square-
faced man of about forty-five, with grey hair and moustache and a florid complexion.
He was wearing a drab suit and a rugger club tie.

'... fine, Minister, I'll see you at eight at the Club. Goodbye,' he said into a green
telephone receiver, laughing nervously as he rang off.



At once a light started flashing on the videophone unit mounted on the huge,
cluttered mahogany desk. He pressed a switch and the smart young lady appeared.

'Outside call for you, General.'
Routledge cleared his throat and grinned roguishly at the screen. 'Male or

female?' he inquired in a public school voice.
'Mr Tobias Vaughn, sir.'
Instantly Routledge's face set in an odd, uneasy half-smile and his eyes dulled

imperceptibly. 'Vaughn? Ah yes... Mr Vaughn...' he stammered uncomfortably. 'Put
him through on priority scramble.'

The screen fuzzed and then Vaughn's smiling face took shape.
'Good afternoon, Routledge. Is this channel secure?' he asked casually.
The Major-General nodded, croaking an indistinct confirmation.
'Excellent,' Vaughn replied, suddenly hardening his tone. 'Now listen to me.

Your UNIT friends have been causing me considerable aggravation. They must be
stopped at once. Do you understand?'

Routledge licked his pale lips and twisted his trembling hands together. 'I... I
understand,' he mumbled after a pause. 'They must be stopped.'

Vaughn's eyes stared unblinkingly into his. 'There must be no more interference.'
'Nomore interference,' Routledge echoedmeekly in a dreamy, mechanical voice.

'I shall deal with it at once.'
Vaughn smiled bleakly. 'Good fellow. I know I can rely on you,' he said with

measured significance.
The screen went black and Routledge sat quite still staring at it for several

minutes:Then he winced and sank his head into his hands and shuddered, slowly
massaging his temples as if to rid himself of a violent headache. Eventually he gazed
back at the screen again, his eyes glazed and lifeless. 'Yes. I understand,' he repeated,
wiping his cold clammy forehead with his sleeve. 'UNIT must be stopped.'

The Brigadier was just cancelling the alert when Captain Turner ushered the
exhausted Doctor and Jamie and their two rescued friends into the Hercules
Operations Room.

'All Red Sector groups stand down and stand by,' he ordered briskly.
Then he jumped up to greet them heartily.
'Mission accomplished, sir,' Turner reported laconically.
'No casualities, jimmy?'
'None, sir. Fortunately Vaughn's jackboot brigade can't shoot for toffee.'
'Splendid!' breezed Lethbridge-Stewart, gesturing towards the welcoming tray

of mugs of steaming tea and generously-filled sandwiches which an orderly was just
bringing in.

Jamie grabbed a doorstep sandwich and started munching avidly. 'Aye, splendid.
A simple rescue operation!' he muttered through his mouthful, glancing ironically at
the Doctor who was nibbling thoughtfully on a more modest portion.

'But what about my uncle? He's still a prisoner,' Isobel pointed out anxiously,
accepting a brimming mug of tea from Captain Turner.

'Don't worry, miss, I'm going to raise hell about this business and get some
prompt action, I can tell you,' the Brigadier promised.



'If you'd had your camera with you, Isobel, you could have made a fortune with
the pictures,' Zoe mused, sipping her tea gratefully.

'Yes. Pity, that would've clinched things as far as the Ministry is concerned,'
agreed Turner.

The Brigadier frowned. 'Billy Routledge will have to take some action now. Not
even Tobias Vaughn can get away with shooting at UNIT personnel,' he declared,
indignantly stirring a heap of sugar into his tea.

The Doctor had not said a word. They all turned to him as he sat hunched over
his untasted tea, chewing absently and staring into thin air.

Eventually Zoe broke the silence. 'What's the matter, Doctor?'
'Mmmm?' mumbled the Doctor distantly, still staring into space. 'Oh, I was just

wondering, Zoe... That object we saw on the other side of the Moon this morning...'
Isobel exchanged looks of astonishment with the Captain and the Brigadier.
'Other side of the Moon?' spluttered the Brigadier, wiping his moustache.
'The TARDIS went wrong and we got stuck,' Jamie explained.
'And they fired a missile of some kind at us,' Zoe added.
'Who did?' demanded Captain Turner incredulously. 'Whoever it was in that

spacecraft behind the Moon,' Zoe told him with patient emphasis.
'Spaceships behind the Moon?' exploded the Brigadier, blowing crumbs in all

directions.
The Doctor gazed around the assembled throng of sceptical faces. 'There appears

to be some kind of deep-space communications installation at Vaughn's factory
complex...' he revealed quietly. 'And I am beginning to wonder...'

The Brigadier looked extremely disturbed at this revelation and he waited
impatiently for the Doctor to continue.

Then Turner suddenly leaned over to his commanding officer.
'Sir, I know it sounds silly, but could those recent UFO reports have anything

to do with all this?'
'Flying saucers?' Isobel exclaimed excitedly, nudging Zoe.
'Golly, what a scoop!'
The Doctor held up his hand for silence. 'Are there by any chance any

photographs of the UFO sightings, Brigadier?' he asked eagerly.
'We've got quite a few in the files,' Lethbridge-Stewart replied, more worried

than ever. 'Jimmy, would you fetch them?'
As the Captain hurried out, the Doctor dipped the remains of his sandwich into

his neglected tea. 'Unidentified Flying Objects...'
he ruminated, biting into the soggy mess, his eyes widening and his nostrils

flaring with anticipation. 'Why didn't I think of that before...?'

Professor Watkins was in a state of nervous anxiety when Packer thrust him into
Vaughn's office.

'What was all that shooting? Where is my niece? If you've hurt one hair of her
head, Vaughn...' he babbled shrilly, blinking myopically at his tormentors.

'I assure you that Isobel is perfectly safe,' Vaughn purred blandly. 'At themoment
anyway.'

Watkins struggled feebly in Packer's restraining grasp. 'I demand to see her!' he
shouted.



Vaughn nodded and smiled. 'And so you shall, Professor. Just as soon as your
machine is completed to my satisfaction.'

Watkins peered at him suspiciously. 'Why am I being taken back to London?'
Vaughn patted his arm affably. 'I am assigning Mr Gregory to work with you,

Professor. You deserve some assistance with such an important assignment.'
'I don't need any assistance,' Watkins panted breathlessly.
'On the contrary,' Vaughn retorted calmly, 'you will have only twenty-four hours

in which to complete the device to my specifications.'
The Professor shook his head violently. 'Never! Never!' he vowed defiantly.

Packer bent the Professor's podgy arm up behind his back and Watkins's plump
body contorted with pain.

'If you cooperate, your niece will go free,' Vaughn promised.
'Otherwise...' He gestured ominously.
'You expect me to believe that?' Watkins scoffed.
Vaughn pointed to the bank ofmonitor screens behind his victim.Watkins turned

and saw several still images of Isobel's frightened face staring out at him. Then Packer
twisted his arm still further and shoved him brutally to his knees. Watkins knelt
between them, moaning and whimpering helplessly.

Vaughn shrugged complacently. 'My dear Professor, you have no choice but to
believe it,' he murmured silkily, his teeth flashing in the darkening room. He glanced
distastefully at Packer but did not reprimand him for his excesses. Then he helped
Watkins to his feet and smiled sympathetically. 'Now Professor, do please try and be
sensible and do as I ask.'

In the UNIT Operations Room, the Doctor was poring intently over a microfilm
viewer, studying a selection of remarkably clear pictures of various strange elongated
hexagonal objects arranged in different formations.

The Brigadier peered hopefully over his shoulder.'Mean anything to you,
Doctor?' he asked after a prolonged silence.

The Doctor ran the film back and forth several times. 'Possibly, Brigadier. How
long ago were these objects first sighted?' he murmured.

'Odd reports have trickled in for over a year, Doctor. We send fighters up to
investigate, but no luck. Nothing.'

Captain Turner craned over the Doctor's other shoulder. 'The strange thing is
they always seem to disappear somewhere over Northern Essex,' he remarked.

'That's where the International Electromatix rnanufacturing complex is!' Isobel
exclaimed.

'Exactly,' said Turner, smiling at her.
The Doctor sat back, rubbing the side of his nose speculatively. 'Jamie, when

you were hiding in the crate you said that whatever it was in there moved...'

Jamie shuddered at the vivid memory. 'Aye, Doctor. There's something wrapped
up in all that plastic web stuff right enough.'

The Doctor meditated for a moment. 'Did you recognise anything about it,
Jamie?'

'Och no, Doctor. It was far too dark and I was too scared,'
Jamie admitted candidly.



The Doctor remained silent for a while, trying to visualise the vague shape they
had seen in the crate inside the railway wagon.

'What do you think it was, Doctor?' asked Zoe in a hushed voice, remembering
only too well her and Isobel's ordeal in the cramped, stuffy containers.

All at once the Doctor stood up abruptly, startling them. 'I'm not sure, Zoe, but
I think we'd better find out as soon as possible.'

Jamie frowned. 'You mean, go back to Vaughn's place?' he cried in disbelief.
'Vaughn's obviously transporting the things from Essex to his London premises.

That's where we'll find our answers,' the Doctor declared decisively. He asked the
Brigadier if he had a map of the London set-up.

Lethbridge-Stewart looked disapprovingly at the bright-eyed little Time Lord. 'I
don't think this is wise, Doctor. You've just been very lucky so far.'

Jamie shoved his thumbs firmly in his belt. 'If you think I'm going back in there...'
he snorted.

'We must find out what is in those containers,' the Doctor interrupted brusquely.
In the ensuing silence, Captain Turner pretended not to notice the Brigadier's

critical gaze and he went over and selected a plastic map sheet from a rack beside
the Situation Map. 'Here you are, Doctor, this shows the entire area in detail,' he said,
handing it to the Doctor.

The Doctor beamed. 'Thank you, Captain.' He grinned at the Brigadier. 'Your
staff are invaluable. Most efficient.' Then he began to examine the map carefully.

Slowly Jamie drew his thumbs out of his belt. Then he got up and went over
to the Doctor. 'Och, we canna get in the same way again. They're sure to be on the
lookout,' he muttered, becoming absorbed in the map.

The Doctor smiled secretively to himself, picked up a pen and started drawing
on the back of his hand, consulting the map from time to time.

The Brigadier cleared his throat guiltily. 'Well, Doctor, anything I can do to
help?' he inquired heartily.

The Doctor traced his finger along a thin wavering line on the plastic sheet.
'Yes, Brigadier, there is. Do you think you could possibly obtain a canoe for me?' he
requested mysteriously.

An hour later, Jamie was sweating profusely and puffing away as he paddled
the small canoe along a bleak stretch of stagnant canal running between tall derelict
warehouses. In the stern the Doctor sat steering effortlessly with his paddle.
Occasionally Jamie cast a resentful glance over his shoulder, but the Doctor always
managed to appear to be doing his fair share of the work at the vital moment, grinning
encouragingly at the toiling Scot. Frequently the Doctor studied the rough sketch he
had drawn on the back of his hand and he hummed scraps of sea shanties to himself
in a tone-deaf groan.

Suddenly they found themselves in pitch darkness as the canal turned sharply
and entered a long tunnel.

'Och, are ye sure ye ken where we are?' Jamie demanded doubtfully.
The Doctor hummed a few more bars, enjoying the added resonance the tunnel

gave to his voice. 'Of course I do, Jamie. I know these waters like the back of my
hand...' he giggled. 'We should be passing underneath Mr Vaughn's railway yards at
this very moment.'



Cold, fetid water dripped on them and invisible fronds of clammy weed flapped
in their faces from the tunnel roof. Jamie began to regret his decision to accompany
the Doctor after all.

When they eventually emerged into the daylight again the Doctor steered
towards a worn flight of slimy stone steps. 'These should lead into the back of the
warehouse,' he whispered. 'Don't make a sound, Jamie.'

They tethered the canoe and cautiously climbed the treacherously slippery steps.
Sure enough, they soon found themselves in a rubble-strewn yard behind the
warehouse buildings.

Two security guards with gauntlets and visors were visible in the distance where
the railway lines entered the loading bay. Pressing themselves against the corrugated
steel wall Jamie and the Doctor crouched down and made their way warily along
the back of the huge warehouse, hoping that nobody would spot them before they
managed to find a way inside.

They were lucky. Not far from the corner, they came upon an emergency exit.
One of the doors was slightly ajar and by contorting his arm, Jamie was able to reach
through the gap and jiggle the jammed releasing bar until it eventually freed itself.
Cautiously he opened the door and they crept stealthily into the warehouse, dragging
the door shut behind them.

As they slipped between the stacks of containers, they heard sounds of activity
nearby. Creeping noiselessly from stack to stack they took care to avoid the prying
electronic scanners ceaselessly panning to.and fro from the roof girders. They soon
reached a central area which was relatively clear except for a row of containers
standing vertically on end, their lids open to reveal silvery cocoons like the one they
had seen in the freight wagon earlier. Two men dressed in heavy protective suits with
gloves and darkened visors were manoeuering a bulky apparatus mounted on wheels
over to one of the open containers.

The Doctor stared keenly at the machine, the two lines running from his nose to
the corners of his mouth deepening with grim concern. The apparatus consisted of a
large central assemblage of tubes and wires topped by a curious corkscrew antenna;
two thick umbilical cables led from the heart of the machine, ending in large crocodile
clip connectors.

'Oh my goodness me,' the Doctor murmured, 'I was right.'
'What is it?' Jamie whispered.
'It looks like a multiphase bioprojector to me, Jamie.'
Jamie nodded, as if he were perfectly familiar with such things.
The two operatives had finished attaching the ends of the cables to the centre of

the cocoon and they retreated behind a glass screen fitted to the apparatus and busied
themselves with the complex array of controls and instruments. The antenna started
rotating faster and faster, like a gigantic drill-bit. A low-pitched hum gradually filled
the vast echoing building and rose relentlessly in pitch and intensity. A faint glow
appeared inside the cocoon, growing stronger as the hum increased.

The Doctor drew Jamie further back behind the stacks of crates as the glow
became a strobing glare which was almost intolerable to look at. A vaguely humanoid
outline stirred inside the cocoon and a silver form began to flash with stronger and
stronger pulses. Jamie and the Doctor covered their ears as the pulsating hum became
an unbearable staccato shriek. In a sudden burst of thousands of silver fibres the



cocoon exploded and a huge gleaming figure jerked spasmodically out of the crate,
flashing and sparking.

Jamie went cold all over and his spine was tickled by a million icy needles.
He gasped as the glittering giant strode forward trailing shreds of its chrysalis and
breathing with a nightmarish mechanical rasp. He turned to the Doctor as the
overwhelming noise quickly died away and only the monster's heavy rhythmic breath
disturbed the awed silence.

'Cybermen...!' he whispered, a tremor of disgust rippling through him as he
recalled his brief encounter in the freight wagon.

With the Brigadier absent on an emergency visit to the Ministry of Defence, Zoe
and Isobel were left in the Operations Room chatting to Captain Turner, while the
other personnel absorbed themselves in their Taskforce duties.

'So what do you think will happen now?' asked Zoe.
'Well, it's not really a UNIT matter now,' Turner explained, 'so we'll probably

hand it all over to the police.'
Isobel looked disappointed. 'Pity, I could've got some great pictures and made a

bomb selling them to Fleet Street,' she brooded.
Turner shot her a flirtatious glance. 'Perhaps you'd allow me to make up for

it by buying you dinner,' he suggested gallantly, eyeing Isobel's long shapely legs
appreciatively.

Isobel looked delighted. 'Why not? Are you stinking rich or something?' she
teased.

Turner laughed. 'Not on a Captain's pay, I'm not, but money isn't everything you
know.'

Isobel considered his dark, handsome features. 'No, perhaps it isn't,' she agreed.
At that moment the door opened and Sergeant Walters brought in Jamie and the

Doctor. They looked tired and drawn.
'What happened?' asked Zoe, eagerly running to meet them.
Jamie put his arm round her shoulder. 'Some auld friends of ours are back,' he

murmured.
Slightly miffed by Turner's attentions to Isobel, Zoe put her arm affectionately

round Jamie's waist. 'Oh, really?' she grinned.
'Who?'
'The Cybermen.'
Zoe looked appalled.
'I'm afraid there's no doubt about it,' the Doctor confirmed gloomily. 'I suspected

as much some time ago, but I didn't want to cause unnecessary alarm, my dear.'
'What on earth are Cybermen?' demanded Isobel.
'Cybermen are inhuman killers from another galaxy,' the Doctor informed her

gravely, sipping some leftover cold tea with a preoccupied air.
Captain Turner floundered out of his depth. 'You mean they're... well, they're

from another world, Doctor?'
'That must have been their spacecraft on the other side of the Moon,' Zoe

confided to Jamie.
Isobel giggled nervously. 'What exactly are they? Little green men?'
Only Turner smiled with her.



'I'm serious,' Zoe protested. 'We've met them before. They're fiendish, sadistic
monsters.'

'Well... where exactly are they now?' Turner demanded, realising that the three
intrepid strangers were in deadly earnest.

'They are being stockpiled at Vaughn's London headquarters,'
replied the Doctor. 'There could be thousands of them.' He sat down, shaking

his head.
'So Vaughn must be working with the Cyber Leaders...' Zoe concluded almost

inaudibly.

The Doctor sighed and nibbled at a curled up sandwich. 'That deep-space
communications installation Jamie and I spotted is no doubt being used to guide and
communicate with a Cyber Fleet,' he told them.

Turner whistled. 'So that's what all those UFO things were...
But there's been hundreds of sightings!' he breathed.
Isobel looked shocked. She turned to the Doctor anxiously.
'How do you think my uncle is involved in all this?' she asked.
'I don't know yet, my dear,' said the Doctor gently. He turned sharply to the

Captain and asked him where the Brigadier was.
Turner told him. 'I'd better get onto him immediately at the MOD and give him

your news,' he added breathlessly.
The Doctor held up a restraining hand. 'Wait a moment, Captain. I believe that

your people discovered that visitors to Vaughn's headquarters seemed somehow
different afterwards?'

'You think the Cybermen are controlling them?' suggested Zoe.
'Controlling them?' Turned echoed uneasily.
Zoe explained that the Cybermen were able to exert control over human minds

but that the victims could appear to be almost normal.
'Who is the Brigadier immediately responsible to?' the Doctor inquired urgently.
'To Major-General Routledge, Doctor. He's with him now.'
The Doctor sprang to his feet as if galvanised into activity.
'Contact the Brigadier at once!' he cried. 'We must warn him!'

The Brigadier was pacing angrily round and round Routledge's dark and musty
office, slapping his brown leather gloves against his leg, his eyes flashing with
indignation.

'No cause for alarm!' he shouted scornfully. 'Billy, do you realise that they
actually took potshots at a UNIT helicopter?'

Routledge leaned on his desk, smiling wryly. 'Alistair, your chaps were
trespassing over their restricted area. What do you expect?'

'Oh, for heaven's sake, Billy, if Vaughn can't trust my mob then he must have
a skeleton in the cupboard.'

The Major-General looked up sharply at this, his green eyes showing a
momentary fear. 'I'm sorry. There is no action I can authorise,' he declared in an
official tone.



Lethbridge-Stewart forced himself to calm down. 'Look, I know Vaughn's a
powerful chap but there should at least be a discreet inquiry into his organisation,' he
proposed reasonably.

Routledge started to blink rapidly. He mopped his forehead with a spotted
handkerchief and cleared his throat awkwardly. 'It isn't our province,' he stalled,
loosening his club tie and undoing his top shirt button.

'Then whose damned province is it?'
Routledge waved his hands about ineffectually. 'All you've given me is vague

reports, Alistair. No conclusive evidence.'
This was too much for Lethbridge-Stewart. 'No evidence?' he shouted

incredulously. 'What do you need, Billy? Corpses?
Wreckage?' He stopped, noticing that a sickly pallor had crept over Routledge's

face. 'What's the matter, Billy? Are you all right, old chap?' he asked with sincere
concern.

Routledge dabbed at his glistening brow again. 'Course I am...
It's nothing...' he mumbled. 'Probably all a terrible misunderstanding.
Leave it with me, Alistair. I'll talk to the Home Office.'
The Brigadier waved his gloves dismissively. 'Talk's no good.
I want immediate action, Billy.'
Routledge clutched at his temples and shook visibly.
'Impossible!' he shouted adamantly.
The Brigadier leaned across the desk, his eyes narrowing suspiciously. 'What

sort of a hold has Vaughn got over you?' he murmured ominously.
For a few minutes Routledge remained silent, slumped awkwardly in his chair.

Then he suddenly sprang up. 'Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart, your forces will take no
action whatsoever without my personal authorisation!' he hissed dangerously. 'That
is an order.'

Taken aback by this abrupt transformation, the Brigadier stood to attention.
'General Routledge, you can override my authority but not that of UNIT Central
Command, sir,' he declared through clenched teeth. 'I shall telex a full report to Field-
Marshal Thatcher in Geneva and act according to his instructions. Good day, sir.'

With that, he turned smartly on his heel and strode out, jamming his cap firmly
on his head.

Routledge sank shakily into his chair. After a while he touched a button on the
videophone and the neat secretary appeared on the screen.

'Yes, General?'
With a supreme effort, Routledge pulled himself together. 'Get me International

Electromatix Headquarters. Mr Vaughn. Top priority scramble...' he snapped,
struggling to preserve his composure.

As Tobias Vaughn, closely followed by Packer, strode purposefully out of the
private elevator into his London office, the videophone was bleeping urgently on the
desk. At Vaughn's touch the screen flickered and the pale tense features of William
Routledge appeared.

'This is priority scramble, Vaughn.'
'Yes, Routledge, what is it?' Vaughn demanded impatiently.
'I'm busy.'



'Listen, Vaughn, Lethbridge-Stewart's started stirring things up and I can't
prevent him,' Routledge blurted out.

Vaughn snorted contemptuously. 'Nonsense, pull yourself together. You have
the authority to...'

'I have no jurisdiction outside this country,' the General interrupted. 'He's sending
a report to UNIT Command in Geneva.

They're bound to investigate. I must say your staff were a bit heavy-handed.'
Vaughn threw a furious glance at Packer who was hovering at the window.

'Listen, Routledge, when will Geneva make a move against us?'
The General closed his eyes and pressed his fists against his temples. 'I think

they... I think... they...' he stuttered feebly.
'What the hell's the matter with the man?' Packer snarled.

Vaughn ignored him, staring impassively at the videophone unit. 'Listen to me,
Routledge...' he enunciated slowly. 'You will obey my instructions.'

Routledge shuddered and opened his eyes. 'Obey your instructions...' he repeated
dutifully.

'You will leave your office immediately and come here to me.'
'Come to you...'The tortured face seemed to relax a little, but the eyes were

pitifully confused.
'Do you understand, Routledge? You will tell no-one.'
'I understand. No-one. I obey. Now.'
The screen dazzled into static and went black.
Packer looked severely shaken. 'What's wrong with him?' he repeated nervously.
Vaughn frowned, clearly somewhat disturbed. 'Our control over him seems to

be weakening,' he admitted.
'But that could be fatal,' Packer protested. 'If he doesn't obey you then we...'
Vaughn stood up, quickly regaining his customary bland manner. 'Oh, he will,

Packer, he will,' he murmured confidently.
Then he rounded sharply on his Deputy. 'What concerns me far more, Packer, is

your bungling ineptitude. That is what has precipitated this whole crisis!'
Packer opened his mouth to object, but then closed it again and his resentment

seeped away to collect like poisonous pus in a festering boil.

6



Secret Weapons

There was a tense hush in the Operations Room inside the Hercules while
Captain Turner and Sergeant Walters tried to contact the Brigadier at the Ministry.
To their dismay they learned that he had already left some time ago and that Major-
General Routledge himself was no longer in the building.

'We're too late, Doctor, the Brig's already seen Routledge,'
Turner reported despondently.
The Doctor shrugged. 'If I'm right and Routledge is under Vaughn's control the

Brigadier will have had a wasted journey, I'm afraid.'
At that moment, Lethbridge-Stewart's voice surprised them. 'I loathe helicopters,'

he boomed from the doorway. 'Utter waste of time, Doctor,' he announced, striding in
and throwing his cap, baton and gloves onto his desk. 'The man's totally incompetent.'

The Doctor poured him a mug of strong tea from the vast pot, sat him down and
quickly told him of his suspicions concerning Vaughn's real activities.

When he had finished, the Brigadier drank the sugarless tea in one prodigious
gulp. 'This is incredible, Doctor,' he cried.

'Cybermen? Are you quite sure?'
'No more incredible than the Yeti,' srniled the Doctor.
'They seem to control some pretty important people,' Zoe remarked.
The Brigadier nodded. 'I wonder who else they have besides poor Billy

Routledge. Doesn't give us much of a chance does it, Doctor?'
'Unless we can upset their plans before they invade,' the Doctor speculated. 'But

there are so many unknown factors..
'Like where they're hiding all the Cybermen,' Jamie butted in.
'That's obvious,' Zoe told him. 'In Vaughn's London headquarters.'

'Not enough room,' Jamie objected. 'He's probably got an underground store or
something.'

Zoe laughed mockingly. 'Oh, really, Jamie...'
The Doctor had been pouring himself some fresh tea. Suddenly he banged the

heavy pot down. 'Jamie's quite right,' he exclaimed to everyone's surprise. 'Brigadier,
would you by any chance have a map of the London sewerage system?'

At a resigned nod from his commander, Turner jumped up and soon returned
with a large plastic sheet.

The Doctor eagerly swept aside the cluttered tray and examined the map. 'Ahal'
he cried triumphantly. 'You see? There's a main flood relief channel running right
underneath Vaughn's warehouse. Now, isn't that a coincidence!'

The Brigadier looked doubtful. 'What about the ah... the water down there:
wouldn't that affect them?'

The Doctor shook his head. 'Anyway, such a tunnel would probably be mostly
dry except after heavy rainfall,' he declared.

Isobel giggled. 'So what do we do? Pray for a cloudburst?'
The Brigadier glanced at her witheringly. 'Please, Miss Watkins, the future of

the world may be at stake,' he scolded.
'I'm sorry, but it's just such a crazy idea to swallow,' she chuckled, nudging Zoe.
'So was the attack by the Yeti, miss. Nevertheless it happened.'



Captain Turner intervened tactfully. 'With respect, sir, she's right. If you go to
Geneva with this story they'll think you've gone bananas.'

Lethbridge-Stewart sighed. 'Yes, Jimmy. We need some concrete evidence.'
The Doctor looked up from the map. 'What we need is some idea of the plan of

attack,' he decided. 'Jamie, have you still got that ghastly little toy Mr Vaughn gave
you?'

Jamie took the miniature radio from his waistcoat pocket and handed it over
reluctantly. The Doctor opened the back and studied the monolithic circuitry again,
muttering to himself in a strange technical jargon as he fiddled about. Eventually he
turned to the Brigadier, his nostrils dilating as if he was beginning to pick up the scent
of a fruitful investigation.

'Do you have any equipment here manufactured by International Electromatix?'
he inquried eagerly.

'Indeedwe do, Doctor.Mainframe computers, various radar and communications
components...' _

'Could I see them at once, please?'
The Brigadier nodded to Turner.
'This way, Doctor,' said the Captain, as the Doctor bounded out of his seat like

a terrier. 'What exactly are you looking for?'
The Doctor grinned enigmatically. 'I don't know until I find it.
A needle in a haystack perhaps!'

Major-General William Routledge sat hunched in the chair facing Tobias
Vaughn across the gleaming curve of the desk, his expressionless eyes peering out
from his bowed, lolling head. Packer hovered restlessly behind him.

'You must tell me,' Vaughn purred. 'How long before UNIT
forces could act against me? How long?'
There was a brief silence. 'One... maybe two days...' Routledge said in a ghostly

whisper.
Vaughn sat back with a smile of satisfaction. 'Time enough.'
Packer stepped forward. 'I don't like this. Suppose they move faster than that?'
'Let me do the supposing, Packer!' Vaughn snapped dangerously.
His Deputy stared down at their miserable, slumped victim whom his fingers

were itching to torture and subdue. 'Yes, Mr Vaughn,' he whined submissively.
'There's a good fellow,' Vaughn smiled. 'Now, just to be on the safe side we'll

conduct a little experiment. Have the Professor's Cerebration apparatus taken down
to the warehouse. I'll join you there shortly.'

'What are you going to do?'
'Wait and see, Packer, wait and see.'
Packer poked Routledge as though he were a sack of potatoes.
'What about this?'
'Leave that to me. Now run along, Packer.'

Smarting under Vaughn's patronising treatment and frustrated in his desire to
deal with Routledge, Packer slowly walked out.

Vaughn locked all the doors by remote control from his desk.



Then he took out his fountain pen and twisted the top. The wall opposite the
windows parted to reveal the glittering secret machine.

As Vaughnwalked over to the alcove, Routledge followedwith his clouded eyes.
Vaughn gazed unblinking at the buzzing apparatus. 'There are some unexpected

difficulties. We must therefore adjust the plan,' he informed it.
'Report the details. We will assess them,' rasped the metallic voice.
'We must bring the invasion forward.'
The machine crackled angrily. 'Our invasion force is not complete.'
'Nevertheless, the invasion must begin in thirteen terrestrial hours time,' Vaughn

insisted unflinchingly. 'Otherwise we may face the combined forces of the entire
world.'

Behind Vaughn, Routledge was now sitting upright, alert and listening.
'Your report is being assessed...' the machine announced, its central crystal

revolving busily to and fro.
'You must accept my judgement or our partnership will terminate,' Vaughn

threatened. 'The invasion will commence at dawn tomorrow.'
As Routledge stared at the bizarre and sinister apparatus in the alcove, his mind

rapidly began to clear and a renewed glint of purpose gleamed in his eyes.
Vaughn stood his ground fearlessly while the Cyber Unit consulted with its

masters. Eventually it replied in a dry brittle tone.
'It is agreed. Data will be revised and new schedules transmitted to you.

Discussion terminated.'
With a victorious, preening toss of the head, Vaughn closed the shutters and

turned round. He found himself staring down the barrel of a compact revolver.
'Dear me, Routledge...' he laughed after a momentary hesitation. 'Are you going

to kill me?'

Routledge steadied himself on his feet and nodded. 'I must,' he croaked.
Slowly Vaughn walked towards him. 'But you can't kill me. I control you.'
Routledge backed away from him, holding the gunwith both hands. 'I knowwhat

you've done to me,' he muttered, 'but I can fight it now.'
Vaughn continued his slow advance. 'No, you can't. And even if you could

squeeze that trigger, you wouldn't be able to kill me,' he murmured almost
hypnotically. 'Now turn the gun round and point it at your chest.'

Routledge uttered plaintive little whimpering noises as he watched his trembling
hands turning the weapon round towards his own body. Tears of frustration ran down
his cheeks as he fought to resist Vaughn's implacable will.

'Now, fire!'
Routledge's whole body shook with violent tremors, as if it were acting totally

independently of his mind. Vaughn winced as a deafening crack split the air.
Routledge remained standing like a waxen dummy for several seconds. Then he
vomited a stream of blood and pitched forward onto his face at Vaughn's feet.

Shaking his head at the mess on the carpet, Vaughn strolled over to his desk and
unlocked the doors.

Down in the warehouse, teams of technicians in protective suits were busy
activating the lines of cocoons in their open containers, using portable machines
identical to the one which the Doctor and Jamie had watched at work earlier.



Packer swaggered in and observed the process critically.
'Come on, get a move on!' he whined. 'Mr Vaughn's ordered a general shake-

up down here.'
He watched the newest Cyberman glowing and bursting into life, a gasp of awe

escaping from his bloodless lips as the monster emerged. It stood about two metres
high, with a square head from which rightangled loops of hydraulic tubing protruded
on either side.

Its rudimentary face comprised two blank viewing lenses for eyes and a
rectangular slit for a mouth. The broad chest contained a grilled ventilator unit which
hissed nightmarishly. Thick flexible tubing ran along the arms and down each leg and
was connected into a flattened humplike unit on the creature's back. Faint gasping
and whirring noises inside the silvery body accompanied every movement. The
movements were spasmodic and jerky at first, but gradually they grew suppler and
more human as the creature strode across to take its place among the assembled ranks
of activated Cybermen standing motionless and silent in row upon row in the centre
of the warehouse.

With a shiver of excitement, Packer marched across to a large steel panel in
the brick end-wall of the building. Opening it with a special key, he threw several
switches in the control box behind the panel. A section of the warehouse wall began
to rotate, slowly revealing a bare brick chamber about a metre above the floor level
of the warehouse. In the centre of the chamber was a circular well about two metres
in diameter, covered by a domed steel lid hinged at one side. A short flight of steps
led up to the chamber level and a steel railing ran round the well at hip-height.

Packer threw more switches and with a grinding hum the massive lid gradually
opened up into the vertical position, locking itself with a series of echoing clunks.
Packer closed the panel and locked it. Then he walked over and climbed onto the
raised platform, staring down into the fetid darkness. Stout steel ladders clamped to
the mouldering brickwork led down from the rim of the well into a huge shaft. Eerie
sounds echoed up from the darkness and a cold, dank breeze wafted fitfully into his
face. Like an admiral on his poop deck, Packer grasped the handrail and turned to the
ranks of motionless Cybermen.

'First Legion,' he snapped. A dozen Cybermen hissed into life and lumbered
heavily forward. 'You have your instructions?' Packer demanded.

'Affirmative,' chorused the creatures with an exhalation of rubbery breath.
'Phase one. Proceed through tunnels to your allotted sector and stand by for Phase

Two,' Packer ordered, thoroughly enjoying his newfound powers.
The Cybermen jerked forward andmarched with creaking, hissing determination

up the steps and onto the platform. Then, one by one, they swung themselves onto the
ladders and down into the shaft. Steadying himself on the handrail, Packer grinned
with delight as he watched the disciplined, obedient monsters disappearing
underground, trying not to retch at the sickly, oily exhalations they released as they
passed him.

'Second Legion. Proceed,' he commanded, swelling with self-importance.
At that moment, Vaughn hurried out of the nearby elevator followed by Mr

Gregory who was struggling with the delicate but heavy mechanism of the
Cerebration Mentor in his scrawny arms.

Vaughn paused for a moment out of sight, watching Packer's antics with scornful
amusement. Then he strode forward.



'There you are, Packer. Everything going according to plan?'
'Yes Mr Vaughn,' Packer preened himself.
'Excellent. Time for our little experiment.'
Gregory set down the Professor's machine on the steps. 'Mr Vaughn; sir, I don't

think this is wise,' he ventured timidly.
Vaughn rounded on him. 'It would be even more unwise not to test,' he hissed

under his breath. 'We must be sure that we have an effective weapon against the
Cybermen.'

Packer looked alarmed. 'You actually intend to use that thing?'
Ignoring him, Vaughn strode across to the nearest cocoon awaiting regeneration.

'I am a man of science, Packer, not a cowardly sadist,' he snapped, motioning to two
technicians to connect the portable bioprojector to the cocoon. 'Now, partially
activate. Just sufficiently to enable it to emerge,' he instructed.

The technicians started up the process.Within a few seconds the Cyberman came
to life amid a shower of sparks and fibres and the piercing undulating whine. As soon
as' it had broken free they switched off and the monster froze, halfway out of its
container.

Vaughn nodded his approval and gestured to Gregory to prepare the Cerebration
device.

'Connect up Watkins's little box of tricks,' he said impatiently.
Reluctantly Gregory plugged two leads into the machine and then fitted the pads,

to which they were connected, on either side of the creature's head.

Vaughn took a step or two back as a precaution. 'I'm waiting,'
he prompted.
Gregory's hands hovered hesitantly over the controls. 'Please, Mr Vaughn, we

don't know what effect this is going to have...' he pleaded.
Vaughn cast his eyes to the roof in despair. 'Exactly. That is precisely why we

are conducting this experiment,' he explained painstakingly. 'Now get on with it,
Gregory.'

'What er... what emotion shall I attempt to induce?' Gregory mumbled.
Vaughn considered for a moment. 'Fear, I think. Let's see how our mighty ally

reacts to fear,' he suggested eagerly.
Gregory selected settings and pressed buttons and then retreated like a child

lighting a firework.
There was a faint clicking sound and the Cyberman twitched slightly.
'Increase power,' Vaughn shouted, his good eye narrowing like the other as he

observed the effect intently.
The clicks increased in frequency. The Cyberman started to writhe and clutched

at the pads convulsively.
'More power!' Vaughn yelled.
'Now it's at maximum...' Gregory shouted, adjusting the settings and taking

refuge behind the nearest stack of containers.
The clicks ran together into a strident pinging sound. Uttering grating, guttural

cries of distress the Cyberman tore off the pads and wheeled about, flailing the air
with its powerful arms. Packer whipped out his pistol and emptied the magazine into
the Cyberman's chest, but the shots had no effect and he was sent reeling across the
warehouse by a vicious blow from the monster's fist.



'I warned you. The device isn't tuned yet...' Gregory screamed.
The crazed Cyberman suddenly turned and staggered up the steps into the

chamber over the sewer shaft, shrieking like knife blades scraping against each other.
'It's following the others into the sewers!' Packer gasped, hauling himself to his

feet in a daze.
'Let it go,' Vaughn ordered impassively, still standing his ground as the

Cyberman disappeared into the echoing shaft.

'The thing's gone berserk. It could've killed me!' Packer blustered, reloading his
pistol as he walked unsteadily over to Vaughn.

The Director smiled sourly. 'Yes, I think we have established that Watkins's
device can be effective. Get him back to work on it immediately, Gregory. I want
more power and remote directional control,' he declared.

The cringing Research Director nodded meekly and set about disconnecting the
lethal machine.

'But what about that Cyberman? We can't leave it rampaging about down there,'
Packer protested. 'It'll destroy everything in its path.'

'Excellent,' Vaughn purred. 'Anyone foolish enough to be down there deserves
to die.'

With a nod to the awed technicians, Vaughn turned and strode back to his
elevator.

The Brigadier was getting rather irritated with the incessant chatter between Zoe,
Isobel and Jamie which was disturbing his concentration while he tried to draft his
report for Central Command in Geneva.

'If you believe those Cyber things are in the sewers why not go down and get
some proof?' Isobel suggested for the umpteenth time.

The Brigadier threw down his pen in exasperation. 'And how do I prove that in
the London sewers there lurks an army of robots from outer space poised to invade
us?' he scoffed. 'Go and capture one?'

'No need,' Isobel retorted cheerfully. 'Just get some photographs.'
The Brigadier considered her for a moment, his annoyance changing to mild

interest. 'Not a bad idea, miss,' he admitted, 'but it's pitch dark down there.'
Isobel shrugged this off casually. 'Okay, so you use an infra-red film with a

number 25 filter and telephoto lens. It'd be a cinch.'
The Brigadier frowned. 'Is that gibberish, or do you know what you're talking

about, miss?'

'Course I do!' said Isobel indignantly. 'All I need is my camera from Uncle's
friend's house.'

The Brigadier grunted. 'Oh no, my dear, this would be a job for our lads.'
'Of all the cretinous bigoted chauvinists...' spluttered Isobel, turning to Zoe for

support.
'I'll get in touch with our photoreconnaissance unit...' declared the Brigadier,

marching briskly away.
Isobel grimaced after him. 'Oh you... you man!' she shouted.
'Och, he's right,' Jamie muttered.



Zoe stared at the grinning young Scot in sheer disgust. 'Jamie McCrimmon, just
because you're a man... well, a boy anyway, you think you're superior.'

Jamie raised his eyebrows innocently. 'I didn'a say that... but it's true!'
Zoe nudged Isobel in sisterly solidarity. 'Righto. Come on,' she cried.
Isobel looked nonplussed for amoment, then the penny dropped. She linked arms

with Zoe. 'What a splendid idea,' she agreed and they moved towards the door at the
rear of the Operations Room.

Jamie barred their way. 'Hey, now where do ye wee lassies think ye're going?'
he demanded.

'Should we let him come?' Zoe consulted her new ally. Isobel grinned. 'Well,
men aren't usually much good in such dangerous situations,' she objected.

Jamie persisted. 'What are ye up to?'
'We're off to London to take some photographs,' said Zoe.
'Coming?'
Jamie looked shocked. 'London? Listen lassie, ye shouldn't go anywhere without

telling the Doctor.'
Zoe stuck out her chin with characteristic defiance. 'Okay, Goody Goody. You

tell him.'
She and Isobel pushed Jamie aside andmarched out to find the friendly Transport

Corporal and persuade him to arrange a secret lift for them.

Jamie hesitated, unsure whether to say anything to the Doctor.
'Och, here we go again...' he muttered at last, trailing uncertainly after the

rebellious females, determined not to be left out...

Captain Turner crept back into theOperations Computer Room to find theDoctor
still engrossed in a piece of circuitry he had removed from the mainframe cabinet of
the Hercules's central processor. With a non-committal sigh the Doctor let the
watchmaker's eyeglass drop into his lap.

'Found something?' Turner asked quietly.
'Yes!' cried the Doctor confidently. 'And no,' he added, holding up the circuit

from the International Electromatix computer and the small back panel from Jamie's
transistor. 'These two micromonolithic systems seem to match...'

'What do they do?'
The Doctor shook his head with a baffled frown. 'I don't know, young man, but

I do know that they have no useful function in either your central processor or in
Jamie's wireless.'

Turner waited, hoping for some enlightenment, but the Doctor brooded silently
over the mysterious panels.

'Why put in a circuit that has no function?' Turner muttered.
The Doctor stood up, weighing the components thoughtfully in his hands. 'Oh,

they serve a function all right, Captain. I'm convinced that these monolithic systems
have something to do with the Cybermen. But I need to conduct certain tests...'

'I'm sure we can arrange whatever facilities you require,'
Turner offered promptly.
The Doctor thanked him politely. 'However I think I'll find what I need among

ProfessorWatkins's equipment in Professor Travers's basement in London if you don't
mind,' he said.



They went through into the Operations Room, where the Brigadier had just
finished briefing his photoreconnaissance unit over the radiotelephone.

The Doctor looked around for his three young associates.
'Where are Jamie and Zoe and Isobel...?' he asked in some alarm.
'No idea,' shrugged the Brigadier, busy at his desk.

'Excuse me sir,' piped up Sergeant Walters, 'but Corporal Benton's driven them
into London.'

'Benton's what!' exploded Lethbridge-Stewart.
'Said they had to get some vital evidence for you, sir.'
The Brigadier looked appalled. 'Evidence for me? Get Benton on the R/T

immediately,' he shouted.
The Doctor looked up from the circuits, utterly bewildered.
'What on earth is going on?' he asked plaintively.
The Brigadier took the Doctor aside. 'I'm sorry, Doctor, but while my back was

turned those crazy kids got it into their heads to slip back to London to try to obtain
photographs of Cybermen... no doubt from the sewers.'

The Doctor flapped his arms aimlessly. 'Oh, my goodness me!'
he gasped, completely at a loss.
The Brigadier fumed silently while he waited for Benton to make contact.

'Benton? At last. What the devil's going on?' he yelled into the radiotelephone.
'Sorry, sir, I thought it was official. The young ladies told me you'd authorised

them to fetch some important photographs from town so I...'
'So you succumbed to the charms of the fair sex... as usual,' the Brigadier shouted

acidly. 'Where are they now?'
'I've just dropped them in the vicinity of Blue Sector One, sir...
corner of Chaplin Street.'
'That's close to Vaughn's headquarters, sir,' Walters put in smartly, listening on

the extension.
'Get them back at once!' ordered Lethbridge-Stewart.
'I'll try, sir, but I'm not sure which way they've gone...' crackled Benton

sheepishly.
'Then find out, Benton, find out. Otherwise you're in deep trouble,' the Brigadier

threatened, purple cheeked with rage. He slammed the receiver down and seized
Turner's arm. 'You'd better take a small force to the area, Jimmy, just in case.'

Turner saluted and hurried out.
The Doctor pulled himself together. 'I'd better go back to London with him. I

want to do some tests on these circuits,' he informed the Brigadier. 'They may be
connected with the Cybermen.

I'll leave my three young friends in your capable hands, Brigadier...'
And he shuffled out after the Captain.
'Don't worry, Doctor, we'll find them,' Lethbridge-Stewart promised. But his face

was furrowed with anxious foreboding as he watched the Doctor depart.

7



Underground Operations

The eerily flickering pinpoints of light in the crystal cast a macabre pattern over
Vaughn's and Packer's faces as they listened to the Cyber Unit rasping in its alcove.

'One hour before Invasion the Cyber transmitter units will be launched into Earth
orbit. Transmission will penetrate to all areas with immediate effect...' it croaked with
sinister detachment.

'And if it doesn't work?' Vaughn inquired calmly.
TheCyberUnit sparkedmenacingly. 'Humans cannot resist Cyber control. Cyber

forces will select suitable humans for conversion. Unsuitable humans will be
eliminated,' it announced.

Packer glanced anxiously at Vaughn. 'Conversion into Cybermen?' he breathed.
'Affirmative.'
Vaughn's face betrayed a hint of vulnerability. 'This is not as we agreed,' he

murmured.
'It has been decided,' rasped the machine.
'No!' rapped Vaughn. 'We agreed that I should remain in control of the Earth and

supply the minerals you require. You will honour our agreement, otherwise there will
be no invasion.' His pale eyes were filled with a wild fire.

The Cyber Unit oscillated with ominous precision. 'To retain such control you
must complete your conversion, Vaughn. You must become one of us.'

Vaughn shook his head vehemently. 'No. My body may be cybernetic but my
mind will remain human,' he vowed.

Packer trembled in the shadows as the machine stopped flickering and there was
a long, tense silence. Vaughn waited, outwardly calm but inwardly strung like a piano
wire.

Eventually the Cyber Unit sparked into life again. 'It has been agreed. Discussion
terminated,' it croaked, falling silent and still.

Vaughn twisted the pen cap in his pocket and the alcove closed up again.
'You're taking a terrible, terrible risk opposing them,' Packer whispered shakily.
Vaughn chuckled drily. 'My dear Packer, they need me. I know they'll try to take

control away from me once the invasion is completed, but they don't know about the
Cerebration Machine, do they? That's our trump card.'

Packer looked scared and sceptical. 'How do we know the Cyber transmissions
won't affect us as well?' he challenged.

Vaughn smiled complacently, his silver hair shining in the fading light. 'We shall
be protected by the implanted shielding capsules,' he reminded him, tapping the back
of his neck. 'You see I've thought of everything, Packer. Everything.'

In the deserted back street, Jamie heaved at the heavy manhole cover while Zoe
and Isobel, with her photographic gear slung around her neck, looked on admiringly.
At last the iron cover shifted and swung open with a tremendous clang. Mopping his
glistening face, Jamie knelt and peered into the gloom.

'Third time lucky,' he gasped thankfully.
'Okay, down you go,' Zoe prompted.
Jamie hesitated. 'Och, at least let's contact the Doctor first,' he pleaded.



'Scared, Jamie?' Zoe twinkled.
He glared at her. 'All right, lassie, just you wait,' he muttered, lowering himself

into the manhole and clambering down the rusty metal ladder set into the shaft.
Zoe winked at Isobel and followed him down.
Just as Isobel followed suit, she heard a shout in the distance.
A young policeman was striding rapidly along the street towards them.
'It's the fuzz!' she warned, scrambling onto the ladder and disappearing into the

sewer.
The constable broke into a run, shouting to her to stop.
Reaching the manhole he called into the dank darkness after them:

'What are you doing down there, you young idiots? Come on out or I'll be down
there after you!'

At the bottom of the deep shaft the intrepid trio huddled together listening
helplessly as the policeman's threats echoed down the tunnels.

'If he goes on like this we'll have every Cyberman in the area on top of us...'
moaned Jamie.

'If there are any,' Isobel giggled nervously.
Zoe grasped each of them by the arm. 'I think there's something along that tunnel,'

she warned.
Isobel opened her camera case and fiddled with the telephoto lens attachment. 'I

can't see anything... but just in case...' she murmured bravely.
Jamie peered in the direction Zoe had indicated. 'I think perhaps we should get

out of here,' he advised in a quavering voice.
But Zoe led them both determinedly forward into the damp darkness. 'This is

what we came for,' she reminded them.
They soon reached a junction. Zoe chose a branch of the fork and cautiously

crept forward with the other two trailing timidly behind her. Suddenly Zoe stopped.
'Yes, I was right,' she whispered.

'Look there.'
They strained to see along the oval, brick-lined sewer with just a trickle of water

in the bottom. A vague shape was just discernible by another junction.
'You kids come on out,' called the constable from the shaft.
'Stop mucking around.'
'Och, ah wish he'd shut up,' Jamie grunted, clenching his teeth to stop them

chattering.
There was a chilling silence. The dim shape stirred. Hissing and high-pitched

bubbling sounds echoed along the tunnel as the Cyberman turned and started
lumbering towards them.

'Fantastic!' gasped Isobel, adjusting the settings and hastily clicking the shutter
button.

Jamie clutched Zoe's cold hand. 'Come on, let's get out.'
But Zoe seemed rooted to the spot, staring at the lurching silver figure as its

warm, acrid breath wafted past them.

'Wait,' Isobel begged. 'I must get a close up... This is absolutely marvellous.'
'Where are you?' yelled the policeman from somewhere behind them.



Isobel's shutter whirred incessantly. She seemed fearless and utterly fascinated
by the advancing apparition.

Jarnie could stand it no longer. He grabbed the girls by the hand and started
dragging them back to the shaft. 'Will ye come away? Ye don't know what yon things
can do to a body,' he muttered at Isobel.

Every few steps, Isobel turned and shot a few more frames of the huge creature
creaking and hissing behind them.

'What's that...Who... who are you...?' they heard the policeman yelling ahead of
them.

Next moment two vivid flashes of light sizzled in the distance.
A dreadful scream tore into their ears and froze them to the spot.
'The... policeman...' gasped Isobel in the awful silence.
'Cybermen must have killed him,' Zoe muttered.
'Killed him?' Isobel quavered, as if suddenly it was no longer all a kind of game.
The grating and rasping sounds were coming at them from both directions now.

Jamie whipped round. The pursuing Cyberman was staggering drunkenly towards
them.

'We're trapped,' he gasped. 'They've got us.'
'What can we do?' Isobel screamed, breaking into a hysterical shaking.
Jamie pushed the girls into the other arm of the junction they had reached and

shielded them with his body as the Cyberman began screeching and wildly flailing as
if striking at an invisible foe: He closed his eyes and waited for the searing blast from
the monster's laser units. But the maddened Cyberman lurched past them as if they
were not there and disappeared in the direction of the shaft.

They gazed after it in amazement.
'It ignored us...' murmured Zoe, trembling with relief. 'Aye,'
Jamie gulped. 'It looked almost mad.'
'It was frightened,' said Isobel, calming down, 'just like us...'

Corporal Benton stood indecisively beside his jeep staring into the open
manhole, his stomach turning at the smell of burnt human flesh rising from the shaft
and his ears ringing with the policeman's dying screams. A second jeep carrying
Captain Turner, a sergeant and two privates rounded the corner and squealed to a halt
next to him. Benton gave Turner a brief report and Turner immediately led his squad
cautiously down the rickety metal rungs into the shaft.

They averted their faces as Turner's flashlight picked out the young constable's
scorched remains a few metres along the tunnel.

The gaping terror-stricken face was puckered like shrivelled polythene.
Turner called out softly at first, then more loudly:
'McCrimmon... Zoe... MissWatkins... Can you hear me? This is Captain Turner.'
The flashlight beam showed the empty tunnel curving gradually into the distance.

There was no response.
'Reckon they've copped it as well, sir?' asked the sergeant quietly.
Turner began to advance slowly. 'These tunnels are a maze.
They could be anywhere...' he whispered. Then he stopped abruptly.
'I think there's someone up ahead.'



Next moment the five men uttered a chorus of astonished gasps as two silver
figures stalked into view round the curve.

'Blimey... what the 'ell are they?' exclaimed the sergeant as five safety catches
snapped off in unison. 'Hold your fire!' Turner ordered calmly. 'Move back slowly.
I think we've found our evidence.'

Isobel tried to wrench free from Jamie's restraining grasp. 'But it's my dolly
soldier,' she insisted. 'At least let's tell him we're here.'

Jamie was adamant. 'Wait, there are Cybermen between us.
We daren't give ourselves away.'
'The next lot might not be so shortsighted,' Zoe pointed out wryly.
They listened. The Cybermen's terrible tramping seemed to recede in the

direction of Turner's voice.
'I do hope James is not alone...' Isobel murmured with a shiver.

The squad backed away from the looming aliens as they advanced, hissing and
whirring menacingly.

'Grenades, Sergeant...' Turner whispered.
The sergeant unhitched three grenades from his belt and carefully handed them

round.
'Do not resist!' one of the Cybermen suddenly warned in a grating voice. 'You

will obey instructions.'
'What must we do?' Turner answered steadily, gesticulating behind his back.
'Pins out,' whispered the sergeant. 'Ready, sir.'
'You will come with us. Obey or we shall destroy you.'
All at once the two Cybermen swung round as the guttural cries of the berserk

third Cyberman suddenly erupted behind them.
'Now!' Turner breathed.
The sergeant and the privates hurled the primed grenades down the tunnel and

the squad threw themselves face down on the slimy brick floor. The grenades rolled
among the feet of the Cybermen as two of them grappled with the crazed newcomer.
Three explosions followed in rapid succession and the sewer filled with smoke and
flying fragments.

As the smoke cleared, the incredulous soldiers saw the crazed alien lurching
to its feet. It seemed indestructible as it jerked inexorably towards them, screeching
metallically. 'Get it, Perkins!'

yelled the sergeant.
Private Perkins fumbled desperately with the pin of a fourth grenade. Just as he

yanked it out, the Cyberman's laser unit strobed with a blinding blue light. Perkins
threw up his arms and staggered backwards, his uniform ablaze and his frozen face
a treacly mask.

The primed grenade clattered along the tunnel towards the crouching squad.
Diving forward, Turner seized it and flung it back at the advancing Cyberman. The
grenade exploded in the monster's chest unit and thick black fluid pumped copiously
out of the severed tubes as part of the tunnel roof collapsed onto its head.



While the sergeant attended to Perkins, Captain Turner cautiously approached
the three prone aliens half-buried under the smoking rubble. He could still hear the
faint sound of strangled mechanical breathing. He shouted urgently into the darkness.

'Jamie... Zoe... Isobel... If you can hear me come out quickly...'
To his relief he heard a faint cry of acknowledgement from Isobel. 'There's not

much time,' he yelled. 'Quick as you can this way!'
'Perkins is dead, sir,' reported the sergeant. 'Harris copped a shrapnel splinter in

the shoulder.'
'Right, get him out of here,' Turner ordered, covering the still breathing

Cybermen with his machine pistol while Benton and the sergeant manhandled Harris
to the manhole shaft.

'Get a move on, you idiots...' Turner shouted, peering into the tunnel as one of
the Cybermen's hands started twitching spasmodically.

Eventually he heard running footsteps and the three fugitives suddenly appeared
round the curve shouting excitedly.

' James... thank goodness you're...'
'Shut up and get out of here,' Turner snapped, jerking his head towards the shaft.
Isobel scowled. 'Well, there's no need to be so rude!' she retorted.
'I've already lost one good man because of you lot and I don't want to lose any

more,' Turner said, bundling them roughly past the gasping Cybermen and the hideous
corpse of Private Perkins.

'See any more behind you?' he asked Jamie as the girls clambered up the ladder.
'No,' Jamie mumbled shamefacedly.
'Well, give me a hand with Perkins's body,' Turner snapped,
'And watch out. Those Cyber things are still breathing.'
Jamie helped sling the corpse over Turner's shoulder and started to follow him

painfully slowly up the ladder to the street.
Suddenly there was a croaking roar from below. Jamie looked down and saw

the glinting figure of one of the Cybermen shaking itself free from the rubble and
lumbering towards the shaft. Above him, Turner was just struggling out of the
manhole helped by Benton and the sergeant. Jamie scrambled up the ladder for dear
life, but just as he reached the surface his ankle was seized in a crushing grip.

Screaming with pain and panic, he fought to free his foot. Benton and Turner
each took an arm and tried to drag him clear, while the sergeant knelt down and
smashed the Cyberman again and again on the head with a rifle butt.

At last the weakened Cyberman released its grip and Jamie was hauled out. Then
the sergeant dropped a grenade into the Cyberman's arms and he and Benton heaved
the heavy iron manhole cover back into place. The thick plate shook as a muffled
explosion spurted smoke round its edges. They all watched the manhole cover in the
ensuing silence. It did not stir.

'I don't believe it,' gasped the sergeant. 'Them things are almost indestructible.'
Turner glanced over at the jeep where Zoe and Isobel were making Private Harris

comfortable. 'Maybe, but we're not,' he snapped, helping Jamie to hobble. 'Let's get
out of here.'

As the Doctor poked among the monolithic circuitry with two probes, frowning
unhappily at the wavering traces on the oscilloscope beside him, he didn't notice the



Brigadier quietly enter themakeshift laboratory in the basement of Professor Travers's
London house.

'Any success, Doctor?'
'Ah, Brigadier. Not yet I fear. There's an alien logic in these circuits, but I haven't

managed to work it out yet,' smiled the Doctor, rubbing his tired eyes.
Lethbridge-Stewart yawned. 'The Watkins girl's just developing her snapshots

upstairs. I'm taking a full report to Geneva in the morning.'
'How long will that take?'
'Depends. Should get some action in a day or two.'
The Doctor stared dubiously at the oscilloscope screen. 'That could be too late,'

he warned glumly.
Just then Isobel burst in waving some large photographic prints still dripping

wet. Zoe and Jamie followed.
'There you are, Brig! Aren't they beauties?' Isobel cried, laying the black and

white prints out on the bench.
The Brigadier glanced at the greyish, blurred shapes unenthusiastically. 'Er...

Well done, Miss Watkins...' he muttered, turning back to the Doctor.

'What's wrong with them?' Isobel demanded in a wounded tone.
The Brigadier attempted a conciliatory smile. 'I don't want to hurt your

professional pride, Miss Watkins, but to be honest they look a little like... well, fakes.'
'But they're Cybermen,' Jamie protested. 'Anyone can see that, ye Sassenachl'
The Brigadier smiled condescendingly. ' You can because you've seen them

before. But I have to convince a bunch of sceptical international defence experts.'
All at once the Doctor leaped up like a Jack-in-the-box. 'Yes, of course...' he

cried.
'What?' Zoe asked eagerly.
But the Doctor sat down again just as abruptly, resuming his tinkering without

another word.

Vaughn and Packer stood in the subdued light of the suspended spherical lamps,
looking out at the lights of the city under the darkening sky.

'It was definitely a UNIT force. They destroyed two Cybermen,' reported Packer
despondently.

'How clever of them,' purred Vaughn.
'But they got out alive, sir. The authorities will know by now,'
Packer whined.
Vaughn shrugged disinterestedly. 'They are powerless to stop us. In a few hours

the invasion will be completed. We shall control all that...' he murmured, gesturing
expansively through the window.

A buzzer sounded.
'That will be Gregory. The Professor's machine must be ready, sir.'
'Excellent. Let them in, Packer.'
Gregory entered, followed by Professor Watkins carrying his Cerebration

Mentor like a precious baby. It looked lighter and more compact and the earphone
pads had been replaced by a long, narrowly tapering horn.



'We've added narrow bandwidth transducers to focus the output directionally,'
Gregory announced, as the Professor placed the device on Vaughn's desk and turned
his back on it.

'This is sheermadness,'Watkins shouted. 'Thatmachine is now a deadlyweapon.'
'I compliment your efficiency,' Vaughn murmured, examining the device

approvingly.
'Those modifications were totally unnecessary,' Watkins protested, blinking

unhappily behind his thick glasses.
'For your purposes perhaps, Professor. But I have a somewhat different use for

your little gadget.'
Watkins rounded on his tormentor. 'Do what you will. It's yours. Now just give

me my niece and let us go free.'
Vaughn laughed urbanely. 'My dear fellow, your niece is already at liberty and no

doubt sitting comfortably at home.' He turned to his Chief Researcher. 'Now Gregory,
how does one operate this thing?'

'Isobel free? I don't believe you!' Watkins whimpered, realising his utter
helplessness now.

'Careful, Mr Vaughn,' Gregory, warned, as Vaughn picked up the device and
pointed it at Watkins. 'Dangerous is it?' Vaughn sneered, pressing a sequence of
switches.

Watkins backed away, wide-eyed with terror. 'Don't... don't point it...' he
beseeched him.

'Do you know what fear is?' Vaughn taunted as the machine began emitting its
evil clicking sounds, rising rapidly to a piercing whistle.

Watkins shut his eyes and pressed his hands over his ears, moaning pitifully.
'Mr Vaughn, you could kill him!' Gregory warned, trying to intervene. Packer

held him back, watching the torture with excited eyes.
'We must make sure he's done his work thoroughly,' Vaughn laughed, increasing

the power so that the whistling rose even higher.
Watkins's glasses fell off his nose as he writhed and cowered against the wall,

his kindly eyes popping widely open as he focussed on some imaginary horror. He
started punching wildly at the air as if warding off some loathsome attacker and then
uttered strangled squeaks of submission. Impassively Vaughn watched the cringing
old man slide down the wall to his knees, sobbing with fear. Then he switched off the
machine and put it back on the desk.

'Most effective,' he beamed. 'I congratulate you, Professor.
Such a pity we cannot test it at full strength. However, we have further need of

your expertise.'
Watkins peered blindly up at him, foaming at the lips and trembling with shock.
Vaughn turned to Gregory. 'You will take the Professor back to the complex

immediately. I want these devices on the production lines at once.'
Packer yanked the old man to his feet and shoved his glasses back onto his nose.
'You force me to work for you, Vaughn,' Watkins suddenly burst out in a hoarse

whisper. 'You are an evil man. I pity you, but given the chance I shall kill you.'
Vaughn gazed at the hunched figure, momentarily disconcerted by his victim's

impassioned threat. 'Kill me, Professor?'
he mocked. 'Would you really?'
Watkins nodded vigorously.



Vaughnwalked over and took Packer's machine pistol out of its holster. He thrust
it into Watkins's hand. 'What are you waiting for?' he laughed, slapping the old man's
tear-stained cheek. 'Shoot me!'

Watkins stared at the gun, then at Vaughn in bewilderment.
'Shoot me!' Vaughn shouted, sending Watkins reeling with another vicious slap

before walking away a few paces and turning.
Recovering his balance, the Professor fired a burst. Shots smashed into lamps

and a video screen.
Vaughn shook his head derisively. 'Surely you can do better than that?' he

taunted. 'Try again.'
Racked with conflicting emotions, Watkins hesitated. Then he took careful aim

and fired again. Several holes appeared in Vaughn's jacket and shirt as bullets
ricochetted round the office. Vaughn threw back his head and laughed at Watkins's
incredulous stare.

'Take him away and get the device into production!' he cried, casually flicking
the torn shreds of cloth off his jacket.

In Travers's basement the Doctor was still struggling to solve the riddle of the
monolithic circuitry. Jamie was fast asleep in an old armchair with his injured foot
propped on a cushion, while Jimmy Turner sat sleepily by his portable radiotelephone
unit on the workbench.

Isobel brought in some tea and shortcake biscuits and sat down beside him. 'Am
I forgiven?' she asked.

Turner grinned. 'Not really your fault, I suppose,' he murmured, patting her hand.
'I just didn't realise about the Cybermen...' Isobel explained.
'I've been listening to Zoe telling the Brigadier all about them for his report.'
Turner shook his head in amazement. 'We hit 'em with four or five grenades and

one still survived! I'd hate to have to tackle a whole army of the things.'
Suddenly the Doctor threw down the circuits in despair. 'No, no, no,' hemuttered,

rubbing his bleary eyes irritably as he rose and walked about restlessly.
'What's the matter?' Jamie gasped, waking with a start and wincing at the pain

in his ankle.
The Doctor ignored him, absently picking up Turner's tea and sipping it deep

in thought again.
At that moment the radiotelephone bleeped. Turner answered it, asking Isobel

to fetch the Brigadier.
'What's the flap?' asked Lethbridge-Stewart, taking the receiver.
'Benton reported from Blue Sector One, sir,' Sergeant Walters's voice informed

him mushily. At 2130 hours he saw two security guards and another man leaving the
IE Headquarters with Professor Watkins. He's on their tail now.'

'We could intercept and release the Professor, sir,' suggested Turner listening on
the extension.

Isobel looked anxiously at the Brigadier.
He frowned. 'I don't like the idea, Jimmy,' he said after a pause.

'Oh come on! Please!' Isobel begged him, clutching his sleeve.



The Doctor cleared his throat noisily. 'Brigadier, the Professor might be able to
help me solve this problem,' he said, waving the two monolithic circuits.

The Brigadier looked unhappy at the risk of further trouble before his mission
to UNIT Command in Geneva.

'It could be a vital chance for a breakthrough,' the Doctor urged him.
Lethbridge-Stewart considered the two earnest faces. Finally he relented. 'All

right. It's your show, Jimmy, but be careful,' he said reluctantly.
Isobel hugged him and gave him a smacking kiss on the cheek.
'Tell Benton to stay with them. I'll contact him en route. I'm on my way,

Sergeant,' rapped Turner into the receiver.
'Vaughn's lot know we mean business now,' the Brigadier warned him. 'They

won't be playing games.'
'Neither will I, sir!' Turner promised and he dashed out with Isobel staring

admiringly after him.
The Brigadier, still blushing from the kiss, reached across and handed the plate

to Isobel. 'Care for a biscuit?' he asked gallantly.

An owl hooted somewhere in the nearby trees. Turner and three UNIT soldiers
sat tensely in their jeep at the deserted crossroads, listening to Benton's regular reports
on the radio giving the position of the International Electromatix company car
carrying Gregory and Professor Watkins back to the factory complex. Thin trails of
cloud scudded across the Moon, giving it a covert, lurking appearance high above
them.

'About a kilometre from your position now, sir,' Benton suddenly blurted.
'Go!' snapped Turner to his driver. The jeep swept out of the side lane and drew

across the narrow road, completely blocking it.
The driver cut the engine and the lights and the fourmenwhipped out their pistols

and jumped into the surrounding hedgerows.
Twenty seconds later, a set of powerful headlights sliced the darkness, followed

by another, some distance behind but gaining rapidly. The International Electromatix
car screamed to a halt a few metres from the jeep. As one of Vaughn's men got out to
investigate, the UNIT force emerged with levelled pistols and challenged him.

The man yelled something and the limousine started reversing, but Benton's
Jaguar roared up behindand cut off its retreat. Another man jumped out and they both
opened fire on Turner's squad. While the UNIT squad fired back, Professor Watkins
opened the rear door of the limousine and scuttled towards the undergrowth along
the lane.

Gregory leaped out after him and raised a revolver at his back.
Before he could shoot the Professor, Benton fired from his car and Gregory fell

dead on the grass verge. At the same instant, Turner's advancing force killed one of
the Professor's escort and the other one fled into the woods and got away.

Turner ushered the shocked and dazed Professor gently into the Jaguar and he
and Benton drove him swiftly back to London with the rest of the squad escorting
them in the jeep.

In Vaughn's darkened office Packer was smacking his bony fists together with
impotent rage.



'It was a UNIT group again,' he fumed, his mean eyes glittering malevolently at
his master. 'I warned you, but you ignored me.'

'Still sceptical, Packer?' Vaughn inquired calmly, reclining in his chair with his
eyes closed.

'Well, what can we do now?' Packer whined. 'We've only got one machine. Now
they've gotWatkins back andGregory's deadwe can't manufacture anymore, canwe?'

If Tobias Vaughn was at all worried by the recent kidnapping he betrayed no
sign of disquiet. 'Once Cyber Control is transmitting the coercion signal the Doctor
and his friends will be utterly helpless,' he reminded Packer. 'You'll be able to pick
them up and enjoy your revenge. Can I trust you to accomplish that?'

Packer stared at Vaughn's shadowy figure with gnawing hatred. 'Of course!' he
snapped petulantly.

'Good.' Vaughn glanced at his luminous digital watch. 'Now, I suggest that you
get some rest,' he murmured. 'There remain just five and one half hours until the
invasion begins...'

8



Invasion

ProfessorWatkins gratefully drank several cups of tea, clutching his niece's hand
with affectionate relief. Then he nibbled at a biscuit and gazed in bewilderment at the
ringof faces around him.

'I know nothing,' he admitted regretfully, 'nothing at all.'
The Doctor sighed dejectedly. 'You've no idea what these micromonolithic

circuits are for, Professor?' he asked for the third or fourth time.
'I'm sorry, Doctor,' Watkins smiled feebly. 'I don't even know why Vaughn

wanted me to adapt my machine.'
'You say he intends to mass produce them?' mused the Doctor.
Watkins nodded wearily and hugged Isobel again.
The Brigadier was baffled. 'Why should Vaughn need such a weapon if he's

already got the Cybermen?'
The Doctor suddenly perked up. 'Professor, you say you adapted your device to

induce excessive emotional responses...?'
Watkins nodded and hung his head in shame.
The Doctor stood up and walked round and round the cluttered bench. 'Emotion

is alien to Cyber neurosystems,' he reflected.
'Perhaps it could be used to incapacitate or even destroy them... Yes, Vaughn

obviously plans to use the machine against the Cybermen once he has no further use
for them.' He gazed at his silent audience excitedly, then he hurried to the bench and
picked up the circuits from the Hercules computer and from Jamie's radio. 'Of course.

Emotional Induction. How could I have been so stupid? No wonder the circuits
aren't logical!'

Professor Watkins jumped up as if infused with new life and joined the Doctor
at the bench. The two of them started muttering together and examining the circuits
through magnifying glasses, totally oblivious of everyone else.

The Brigadier consulted his watch. 'Heavens, I must get back to the Hercules,'
he exclaimed. 'I'm leaving at dawn for Geneva.

Contact me at once it the Doctor comes up with anything, Jimmy,' he ordered
and strode briskly out.

Zoe and Jamie glanced across at the bench. The Doctor and Watkins were deep
in animated discussion over the oscilloscope.

Jamie yawned cavernously and settled himself back in the armchair.
'Wake me if anything happens, Zoe,' he mumbled and closed his eyes.
Zoe gaped at him in disgust. 'You're incredible,' she exclaimed.
'You'd sleep through anything. For all we know, the Cybermen might be lurking

beneath us at this very moment!'

Frantically Jamie struggled to shake himself free as the repulsive creature began
to devour his foot. He woke with a start to find that Zoe was tugging his arm.

'Quick, Jamie, the Doctor's discovered something!' she cried.
On the wall the Doctor had sketched a large diagram showing the Earth ringed

by a number of satellites and the Moon with the Cyber mother-craft on its hidden
side. Professor Watkins, Isobel, Zoe, Jamie and Captain Turner gathered round as he



explained his theory with mounting excitement. He drew a dotted line from the Cyber
craft round the Moon to the side facing the Earth.

'Now, they'll move round and their transmitters will hunt for the frequencies used
by these satellites,' the Doctor told them. 'The satellites will then boost their signals
and relay them to Earth...'

'And the signals will activate these micromonolithic circuits,'
put in the Professor, holding one up.
'Exactly,' resumed the Doctor. 'These circuits are artificial nerve networks and

once activated by the Cyber signals they will no doubt induce the hypnotic force being
used to control the humans already in their power.' The Doctor held up the back of
Jamie's radio.

'There must be hundreds of thousands of these circuits in International
Electromatix components all over the world,' he concluded gravely.

'So everyone will come under their control,' Zoe murmured.
There was a shocked silence.
'Is there nothing we can do?' Turner asked earnestly. Zoe clicked her fingers.

'The depolariser, Doctor!' she cried.

The Doctor beamed at her. 'Exactly, Zoe. What a good memory you've got.' He
turned to the others. 'Fixed to the back of the neck, the depolariser can jam the control
signals,' he explained.

'Neuristors!' cried ProfessorWatkins, turning to a large cardboard box filled with
oddments. 'I think I've got a few here somewhere..

'Splendid!' cried the Doctor, rubbing his hands together and springing to life
again. 'Zoe, you help the Professor to make us some depolarisers. We'd better arm
ourselves with immunity immediately.'

He turned to the Captain. 'What time is it?' he demanded.
'Four in the morning, sir.'
'Please call the Brigadier on the radio. I'd better talk to him at once. The invasion

could begin at any time!'
Within a few seconds the basement had been transformed into a hive of activity

as the Doctor and his friends began the race to stop Vaughn and his alien allies from
conquering the Earth.

The only sound in Vaughn's dimly-lit office was his calm rhythmic breathing as
he lay tilted hack in his chair, his lazy eye half open in macabre vigilance, the other
peacefully shut. Suddenly a strident bleeping brought him instantly awake. He took
up his fountain pen and twisted the cap. The wall obediently parted, exposing the
wide-awake Cyber Module whirring and prickling with intense light in the alcove.

'All is prepared?' it demanded.
'Of course,' answered Vaughn from the shadows.
'Invasion Zero will be one Earth hour from now. Countdown will commence

now.'
'How melodramatic...' Vaughn smiled to himself as a regular electronic pulse

started marking the seconds off one by one.
'We are moving into position to transmit the coercion signal.
Transmission will commence in thirty minutes.'



'Yes, yes, yes, I'm well aware of the schedule,' Vaughn muttered sarcastically to
himself, closing his eyes again.

Just then, Packer slipped noiselessly into the room from the private elevator.
Vaughn swivelled in his chair. 'A few minutes, Packer... A few minutes and I shall
control the entire planet,' he whispered, gazing out over the lights of the capital.

Packer glanced at the pulsing luminescent machine. 'You?' he murmured
doubtfully. 'Are you sure of that?'

Vaughn's chair spun round to face him. 'Quite certain, Packer,'
he snapped. 'Quite certain.'

The Doctor had done his best to explain to the Brigadier on the radiotelephone
the exact procedure for constructing the vital depolariser jamming device.

'You must get them fitted immediately,' he repeated. 'If your technicians need
any more advice just contact us here.'

'I'll get all my boffins on to it at once,' Lethbridge-Stewart assured him. 'Over
and out.'

'Over and... and all that,' the Doctormuttered. He hurried back to the benchwhere
Zoe and the Professor were hard at work making masses of fiddly connections. 'How
many have you managed to knock together?' he inquried anxiously.

'Only five so far,' Zoe admitted. 'We can't find enough of those neuristor things.'
The Doctor looked worried. 'There must be some more among all this junk...

er, this equipment,' he said, starting to rummage frantically in the boxes littering the
bench and piled underneath it.

'We've got to make enough for everyone here at least.'
Upstairs in the makeshift studio, Isobel had opened the blinds and was looking

at the pale rose sky heralding the sunrise over the city.
'Penny for them,' whispered Jimmy Turner, appearing at her side.
She smiled wistfully. 'It's great. It all looks so peaceful.'
Turner agreed. 'Perhaps the Doctor's wrong about the invasion after all,' he

suggested unconvincingly.
Isobel looked doubtful as she fingered the small cluster of transistors and wires

taped to the back of her neck. 'He's been dead right so far,' she reminded him.
They watched a milkman making his deliveries to the houses opposite and a

paperboy whistling as he cycled along the street. Then all at once they glanced
uneasily at one another and Turner instinctively put his arm round Isobel's shoulder.
The air seemed suddenly dry and brittle. A feeling of nausea swept over them and they
felt a dull pain behind the eyes. A sudden crash outside made them look out again.
Several milkbottles had shattered on the pavement and the roundsman was clutching
his head and staring up into the sky. The paperboy took his hands off the handlebars
and clapped them to his ears. Wobbling drunkenly, he careered across the street and
crashed into the milk float. They heard a cry and heavy thump from the basement and
then Zoe screamed.

They dashed out and down the steps under the stairs.

The Doctor was staggering round and round the basement in smaller and smaller
circles with Jamie clinging to his arms in an attempt to prevent him injuring himself.
At the bench, Professor Watkins was feverishly connecting some tiny wires with a
soldering-iron.



Zoe glanced up as Isobel and the Captain rushed in. 'The Doctor hasn't been fitted
with his depolariser yet,' she cried anxiously.

The Doctor groaned with pain and collapsed in Jamie and the Captain's arms.
They lowered him gently to the floor where he lay deathly still, staring sightlessly
up at the ceiling.

'Hurry up, Professor... please hurry...' Zoe pleaded.
Watkins bustled over to them with the depolariser. They turned the Doctor over

and Zoe carefully taped the lash-up to the back of his neck. Abruptly the Doctor went
rigid with a spasmodic shudder.

'Doctor... Doctor, are you all right...?' Zoe cried, loosening his collar.
The Doctor lay prostrate, his breathing snatched and rapid and his eyes glazed

over. They watched anxiously for some sign of revival. A tremendous crash from the
street sent Isobel running back up to the studio.

A bus with a few writhing, goggle-eyed early morning passengers aboard had
crashed into the milk float and steam was hissing from its ruptured radiator in a white
jet. Then Isobel saw something that chilled her to the marrow. A heavymanhole cover
in the middle of the street was suddenly flung into the air and it rolled clanging into
the gutter. A gleaming silver figure clambered out of the sewer and stood with legs
apart, swinging its masklike face to and fro in search of victims. It was followed by
several more Cybermen and the group of malevolent giants strode off like figures in
a nightmare, their blank eyes gaping and their slit mouths giving their faces a sinister,
frozen smile as their thick, stubby fingers grabbed viciously at the air.

Isobel was transfixed for a few seconds by the awesome spectacle. Then she ran
back down the steps into the basement.

The Doctor was sitting up and groggily massaging his temples.
-
'The Cybermen...' Isobel gasped. 'They're coming up out of the sewers... the

invasion's begun!'
The Doctor blinked several times and then jumped to his feet, scattering his

startled helpmates. 'Don't stand around like zombies!'
he shouted. 'Don't you know the invasion's already begun?'
Zoe and Jamie tried to calm him, but he resolutely ignored them.
'Is everyone else all right?' he demanded, bustling round the basement as if

nothing had happened to him. 'What about the Brigadier and the rest of UNIT?'
Captain Turner hurried to the radiotelephone. At last Lethbridge-Stewart came

through faint and distorted.
'Chaos here, Jimmy. Only half the crew have recovered so far..
The Doctor grabbed the receiver. 'What about the other UNIT
forces, Brigadier?'
'No hard news yet, Doctor. I'm sending Walters over there to pick you up. You'll

be a lot safer here.'
The Doctor agreed. 'But be careful, Brigadier, the streets will soon be full of

Cybermen.'
'Roger, Doctor. Just stay put,' the Brigadier ordered and clicked off.
Turner looked deeply disappointed. 'Sounds like a walkover for Vaughn and the

Cybermen,' he muttered.



The Doctor nodded ruefully. 'And we're sitting right in the middle of the hornet's
nest!' he sighed, trying to get rid of the irritating itch that was developing under the
depolariser taped to his neck.

The sunrise flooded dramatically into Vaughn's office, lighting up his face with
a dull red glow as he lay back in his chair listening to the incessant grating chatter
of the Cyber Module.

'All areas are now covered by our transmissions. The full invasion force is
mustering for despatch. Initiate ion beam for navigation.'

'All is ready,' Vaughn responded calmly.
'Prepare communication network for Cyberforce Control.'
Vaughn suddenly stood up. 'Wait. The Cyberforce must remain under my

control,' he insisted.
The machine glowed brilliantly and the crystal whizzed back and forth

agitatedly. 'Why do you oppose us?' it challenged him.
'I do not oppose you. We are allies,' replied Vaughn soothingly. 'But you do not

understand the world as I do.'
The machine glowed even brighter. 'Humans are now under Cyber Control.'
Vaughn strode fearlessly across to the alcove. 'You will not achieve your

objective unless I too get what I want,' he persisted. 'Is this agreed?'
The Cyber Module fell silent for a long time. Then it buzzed alarmingly and a

smell of hot plastic filled the room. 'It is agreed,' it acknowledged eventually.
Vaughn smiled. 'Excellent. The invasion will proceed under my direction.

Discussion terminated.' He twisted the pen cap sharply and the wall slid back into
place.

As Vaughn subsided thankfully into his chair wiping the nervous sweat out of
his eyes, the videophone bleeped and Packer appeared on the screen, his mean face
pale and taut. 'Mr Vaughn, we've located the Professor...' he reported breathlessly.

'Excellent, Packer. Pick him up immediately,' Vaughn purred, hurriedly
composing himself.

'But the UNIT mob, sir...'
'They will not offer any resistance. They are all under our control.'

'That's just what I'm afraid of,' muttered Packer inaudibly.
Vaughn leaned forward ominously. 'Packer, this is your last chance. GetWatkins

and put him to work on the Cerebration machines at once,' he shouted.

After a terrifying drive through the chaos of disorientated humanity, Sergeant
Walters skidded his jeep to a stop outside Professor Travers's house and ran up the
steps. Captain Turner let him in just as the Doctor and the others came up the stairs
from the basement.

'Thousands of them silver gnomes everywhere, sir,' Walters reported sturdily.
Therewas a scream of brakes outside. Turner slammed the door and shot the bolts

home. 'It's Packer's mob,' he shouted over his shoulder. 'Out the back way quickly.'
As everybody turned and fled down the hall, a gun barrel crashed through the

glass in the front door. Backing away, Turner fired his machine-pistol at the shadowy
figures outside. The gun barrel fired a five second burst just as Jamie was ushering the



Professor back down the cellar steps. The Professor cried out and staggered. Turner
fired another burst then caught Watkins as he fell and slung him over his shoulder.

'Get out, Jamie!' he shouted, hauling the wounded Professor down into the cellar.
Jamie had paused to retrieve the radiotelephone unit which Turner had just

dropped. As he started down the stairs after the others, another salvo from the front
door caught him in the leg. He collapsed and started crawling to safety, dragging
the radio behind him. The next moment, Sergeant Walters came running back up the
stairs. He fired a long burst at the door and then carried Jamie out into the overgrown
garden at the back of the house.

The others were waiting anxiously. Turner contacted the Brigadier on the
Doctor's polyvox unit while Walters covered the rear of the house with his pistol. The
girls tended the injured Professor and Jamie.

'We're in a bit of a spot, sir. Could you send us a chopper?'
asked Turner.

'Wilco,' replied the Brigadier promptly. 'Can you reach Blue Sector Five?'
'We'll do our damnedest, sir, but we've got two wounded.'
'Right. Chopper on its way. Good luck, Jimmy. Out.'
Out in the street, Packer's jeep was speeding back to Vaughn's headquarters,

leaving three security guards dead on Travers's doorstep.

Soon afterwards, Packer stood in silent humiliation in front of his master's desk.
'How?' Vaughn muttered, grinding his teeth in exasperation as he gazed out over

the paralysed city. 'How can they be immune to the Cyber coercion signal...?'
Packer shot him a crafty look. 'It must be that Doctor character's expertise. You

should have eliminated him when you had the chance. Now he's out-manoeuvering
you,' he whined accusingly.

Vaughn swung round from the window, his face a mask of contempt. 'I am still
in control of the invasion, Packer,' he whispered hoarsely. 'Without me you would be
wriggling like a worm in a puddle of acid.'

But Packer's defiance grew stronger and he faced Vaughn unflinchingly. 'We
don't have the Professor, so we can't produce any more machines, so we can't control
the Cybermen,' he rapped out harshly.

Vaughn stared at him with undisguised smouldering loathing.
'Do you still believe everything's going according to plan?'
Packer went on recklessly. 'Do you still think you can win?'
'Contact the Antenna Unit. It is time to project the ion beam,'
Vaughn suddenly snarled. 'The invasion force must be sent in at once!'
Packer's hand was resting on the handle of his pistol. He lingered for a moment

as if undecided. Then he obediently picked up a telephone and rapped out an order.

Themighty Hercules whined reassuringly through the thin clouds. On the ground
far below, all normal life had ceased within a matter of minutes as the millions of
monolithic circuits scattered all over the world amplified and focussed the Cyber
coercion beam being transmitted via the satellites from the neighbourhood of the
Moon.



In the Operations Room, the Signals Officer was reporting the general situation.
'Washington's off the air, sir... Moscow and Peking dead as doornails... Nothing at
all, sir.'

'Keep trying, Sergeant, all frequencies.' The Brigadier turned gravely to the
Doctor. 'Seems to be a total radio blackout,' he murmured.

'Couldn't we make masses of these depolariser things and distribute them to key
personnel?' suggested Captain Turner.

The Doctor shook his head emphatically. 'No time, I'm afraid, even if we could
obtain the components. The Cybermen will attack us in force soon. There must be an
entire fleet out there, waiting behind the Moon.'

The Brigadier thumped his desk in frustration. 'We're utterly helpless...' he
groaned.

'Unless we can stop the Cyber transmissions,' the Doctor mused quietly.
The Brigadier glanced hopefully at him. Then his face fell again. 'We'd need an

orbital launch vehicle... We don't have anything of that size available.'
'Only the Americans and the Russians...' Turner sighed.
Suddenly the Brigadier stood up. 'Wait a sec!' he cried, going over to a security

cabinet and dialling a sequence of combination codes. A drawer clicked open and he
took out a thick file marked MOST SECRET and leafed quickly through it.

'I was right!' he announced delightedly. 'The Russians had a countdown in
progress at dawn... unmanned orbital lunar survey.

They must have a rocket almost ready to go.'
'So we could fit a warhead in place of their survey module,'
Turner proposed brightly.
'Possibly, Jimmy.'
They turned to the Doctor inquiringly. He looked doubtful.
'How long would all that take?' he asked.
'We should be able to get a medical and technical unit there in a couple of hours,

Doctor. Once we'd fitted the Russians with your depolariser things... well, it would
be up to them,' replied the Brigadier. 'How long do you think we've got, Doctor?'

The Doctor shrugged. 'I confess I'm rather surprised they're not here already,' he
said with a preoccupied air.

'Well, I think it's worth a try,' said the Brigadier, handing some papers from the
file to Captain Turner. 'Here's the gen on the Russian launch, Jimmy. You deal with
that top priority,' he ordered decisively. 'And get your skates on.'

Turner saluted and eagerly departed to prepare for his vital mission.
Just then the Hercules banked steeply and started to descend rapidly.
TheBrigadier went over to theDoctor whowas sittingwithdrawn and thoughtful.

'Could we intercept the Cyber fleet with anti-missile missiles, Doctor?' he asked.
The Doctor cocked his head non-committally. 'Possibly.
They'll be homing in on Vaughn's ion beacon out at the compound, I imagine.'
Lethbridge-Stewart consulted his Situation Map. 'Right.
There's an RAF base at Henlow Flats equipped with Taktik missiles...' he

muttered, striding down the busy Ops Room to brief his staff.
Zoe wandered in from up front and went over to the brooding Doctor. 'I think

we're landing...' she murmured.
The Doctor stirred. 'Ah... how's Jamie's leg, my dear?'



'Just a flesh wound, but he's furious because the doctor won't let him walk on it.
The Professor's okay too. Isobel's looking after him.'

'Jolly good,' muttered the Doctor vaguely. 'Zoe, I suggest you give the Brig a
hand... much as I detest computers I suspect your remarkable little brain could be very
useful to him in the next couple of hours.'

Zoe sniffed eagerly. 'All right, Doctor. What's cooking?'
The crumpled little figure seemedmiles away. 'I think it's high time I had another

little talk with Mr Vaughn...' he muttered absently.
Zoe gaped at him in disbelief. 'You're joking, of course,' she cried. 'Go back to

Vaughn? He'll kill you as soon as look at you.'

The Doctor grinned bleakly. 'Quite possibly, Zoe, but we desperately need more
time and I'm sure I can buy us that time.'

The Brigadier had overheard the little Time Lord's insane proposal. 'This is
madness. I can't afford to allow you to try it,' he snapped.

TheDoctor rose. 'You can't afford not to, Brigadier,' he retorted. 'Once you attack
the Cybermen they'll retaliate. We must know how and with what.'

Zoe looked sceptical and anxious for the Doctor's safety. 'How can you find that
out?' she demanded.

With a mischievous twinkle in his eye the Doctor took out the polyvox unit. 'I'll
leave this little toy switched on. You'll be able to hear everything that passes between
me and Tobias Vaughn,' he explained.

The Brigadier snorted dismissively. 'But you'll never get near the place, Doctor.
The city's crawling with Cybermen.'

'There's one place where there won't be any Cybermen now...'
confided the Doctor, tapping his nose '.... In the sewers!'
At that moment the FASTEN SEAT BELTS sign lit up and a few minutes later

the Hercules touched down on a remote disused airfield.

Zoe and Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart stood at the bottom of the ramp waving
goodbye and good luck as theDoctor drove the landrover out of the cargo bay. Tooting
a jaunty farewell on the horn he sped off across the windswept grass-clogged concrete
and disappeared.

'Take care, Doctor,' Zoe whispered, biting her lip. Then a second jeep emerged
down the ramp and stopped.

'The Tornadoes are due here in fifteen minutes,' the Brigadier informed Captain
Turner. 'You should reach the Nykortny Space Centre in about two hours. Got enough
depolarisers?'

'Yes, sir. The Professor's done us proud in spite of his wound.'
'Good luck, Jimmy.'
The jeep drove off towards some Nissen huts and the Brigadier led Zoe back up

into the plane and the ramp closed behind them. In the Operations Room the Brigadier
issued a string of curt orders right and left.

'Sergeant, ask Wing-Commander Robbins to take us to Henlow Flats Missile
Base immediately and send a chopper to Blue Sector One in case the Doctor needs it.
All UNIT operational groups Red Alert Status.'

They were soon airborne again and it was not long before the Doctor's cheery
voice came crackling over the polyvox receiver, echoing eerily.



'I've just entered the sewers and I'm making my way towards Vaughn's
headquarters.'

'For God's sake, be careful, Doctor,' snapped the Brigadier.
'Oh, don't worry about me, the air's surprisingly fresh down here,' replied the

Doctor earnestly. 'I'll call you when I reach Vaughn's. Down and out.'
'Over and out,' sighed the Brigadier anxiously.
'Your helicopter isn't going to be much good if the Doctor does meet any

Cybermen down there,' Zoe remarked with a frown.
Lethbridge-Stewart flashed her an irritated glance. 'Perhaps I should send a

submarine, miss,' he retorted defensively.

9



Counter Measures

Vaughn and Packer were poring over a vast map of the world.
Outside the wide windows behind them everything was unnaturally quiet and

still, except for the pigeons flapping over the rooftops and the odd car horn sounding
under the slumped body of the driver.

'All main communication centres are now in the hands of our people,' Vaughn
announced with smug satisfaction.

Packer looked unconvinced. 'But we can't do any more without the rest of the
Cyber force,' he objected obstinately.

'They'll arrive, Packer, never fear. And when they do, there won't be a city in the
entire world that we don't control,' Vaughn assured him in a strange singsong voice.
'Think of it, Packer... the entire world!'

A whooping alarm sounded from the video bank and the screens flickered
automatically into life.

'Security alert,' Packer whined with a haunted look. 'The UNIT
mob must have got through somehow.'
Vaughn glared at his Deputy and then punched a hold button as the screens

flashed up a continuously changing sequence of views of the headquarters buildings.
On one of the screens the Doctor's bulbous features loomed like a mischievous
gargoyle.

'Good morning, Mr Vaughn, can you hear me?'
'Yes,' Vaughn hissed into the desk microphone, his eyes burning with hatred.
The gargoyle grinned. 'Oh, jolly good. Hope I haven't dropped in... or rather

popped up at an awkward moment, but I'd rather like a word with you,' the Doctor
said breezily, straightening his rumpled collar and brushing his lapels.

Vaughn smiled acidly at the microphone. 'Clever of you to outwit the coercion
beam, Doctor.'

The Doctor shrugged modestly. 'Well, to tell you the truth it's been a bit of a pain
in the neck,' he quipped cheekily. 'Shall I come up? I do know the way.'

The mocking face vanished from the screen.
'He must be out of his mind,' Packer exploded.
'Far from it, Packer. Make a security check in case he's brought any friends with

him again,' Vaughn ordered calmly.
Packer spoke tersely into his wrist radio.
'We'll kill the bastard this time,' Packer resolved, his beady eyes glinting.
Vaughn sighed with infinite patience. 'No, Packer, we will do no such thing. You

forget the Doctor's travel machine. He's our insurance.'

The whine of the Hercules's turboprops faded as the UNIT
Airborne Operations Unit touched down at Henlow Flats Missile Base north-

east of London.
'Stand by, raiding party. Defensive stance. Attack only if necessary,' snapped the

Brigadier, buckling on his pistol.
At that moment, the Doctor's voice came through again on the polyvox receiver.

'Just about to enter the lion's den,' he reported. 'I'll leave this thing switched on now...'



The Brigadier wished him luck. Then he ordered the Signals Desk to keep the
channel open. 'Get the whole lot on tape. If he needs help throw in everything we've
got in Blue Sector.'

Zoe hurried in carrying a box of depolarisers which she and the Professor had
managed to cobble together. 'Hope there'll be enough to go round,' she said.

The Brigadier complimented her warmly.
They froze as a cultured voice purred silkily from the polyvox speaker. 'Ah...

Doctor... What an unexpected pleasure... Come in and sit down...'
Zoewanted to stay and listen, but the Brigadier took her firmly by the arm. 'Come

along, Miss Zoe, and keep close to me. We've got work to do,' he ordered.

Seated in a comfortable chair, the Doctor had listened to Vaughan's arrogant
story with inward contempt but with a smile of respectful admiration playing on his
mild features. As his host fell silent, the Doctor studied him with thinly veiled
incredulity.

'And you trust these Cybermen?' he exclaimed.
'I know them' Vaughn boasted, dramatically silhouetted against the panoramic

windows. 'I know the way they think... their single-minded purpose...'
'Then you must realise that they are ruthless inhuman destroyers.'
'Naturally, Doctor. I have worked with them for five years on this project. They

are my allies, not my enemies,' Vaughn purred.
The Doctor raised his dark eyebrows. 'You actually believe they'll honour the

bargain you have made with them?'
Vaughn squinted imperiously down at the small, hunched figure sitting opposite.

'I planned this whole operation, Doctor,' he claimed with smouldering passion. 'It was
I who contacted them far out in the Solar System. They are merely providing their
strength and technological skill to fulfil my vision.'

The Doctor leaned forward, his eyes like gimlets as they searched into Vaughn's.
'In return for what? What do the Cybermen gain from it all?' he demanded.

Vaughn chuckled throatily. 'What they want and what they get are two very
different things, Doctor.'

The Doctor was not impressed. 'Two can play at that game.
Once the invasion is completed they'll just toss you aside like a spent cartridge.'
Vaughn leaned forward in turn. 'All Cybermen are programmed to obey my

orders, Doctor,' he smirked.
'Oh, your bunch of silver sewage workers might be. But what about the ones

sitting out there around the Moon?' challenged the Doctor. 'Will they do as they're
told, Vaughn?'

Vaughn hesitated. For the first time his eyes betrayed a shifty uncertainty. There
was a tense pause. 'If they do not, I shall destroy them with the Professor's machine,'
Vaughn retorted.

The Doctor snorted. 'With one single solitary device?'
'More will be made.'

'Not without the Professor's help. And we have the Professor.'
Again Vaughn hesitated, deeply troubled but still smiling smugly. 'I have no

reason to doubt my allies,' he murmured.



The Doctor stood up. 'You can't possibly take such a gamble!'
he cried earnestly. 'If the Cybermen do take control of the Earth, they will destroy

all life as we know it.'
Vaughn walked round the desk, smiling malevolently. 'You're just playing for

time,' he sneered. 'You presumably managed to protect your UNIT cronies from the
coercion signals. What exactly are they up to now?'

'You are living in a fantasy world,' the Doctor shrugged calmly.
Vaughn flicked a switch on the desk. Packer appeared on a monitor screen. 'Are

the ion beam transmitters aligned?' he demanded.
'Affirmative. The fault's just been rectified,' Packer replied.
Vaughn switched Packer off and took out his fountain pen.
'Your friends are too late, whatever they're trying to do,' he crowed triumphantly,

twisting the pen top.
The astonished Doctor watched in horrified fascination as the wall opened to

reveal the Cyber Module spitting and sparking in its lair.
'Your delays must cease forthwith,' rasped the machine.
'Transporters are prepared to launch.'
'We are locking on now,' Vaughn confirmed.
'Confirmation Invasion Fleet First Stage completed,' the machine croaked.

'Second Stage initiating now...'
The Doctor shielded his eyes as he tried to study the sinister alien apparatus from

the other side of the office. 'This is madness, Vaughn. You must stop now!' he burst
out, gazing momentarily at the brilliant, flashing crystal and covering his seared eyes
again.

But Tobias Vaughn was trembling with fanatical determination. 'You don't
understand...' he whispered. 'I can't see all those years of work wasted. I must go on!'

In the small concrete control block set within a massive bunker buried in the
middle of the Henlow FlatsMissile Base, teleprinters clicked quietly and radar sweeps
silently tracked round and round and back and forth. A dozen Air Force personnel
lay slumped over the computer guidance and radar terminals, apparently dead. At the
Controller's desk mounted on a raised central dais, a young Squadron Leader was
hanging over the arm of his revolving chair, a red telephone receiver still tightly
gripped in his nerveless hand.

Suddenly the door flew open. Lethbridge-Stewart quickly appraised the situation
and strode in followed by Zoe and four troopers.

'Get these chaps fitted up with depolarisers,' he ordered, after checking one or
two pulses.

While Zoe and the troopers set about taping the neuristor assemblies to the backs
of the airmen's necks, the Brigadier called the Operations Room on his polyvox unit.

'What's the state of play, Walters?'
'Captain Turner reports that he's just crossed the Russian border, sir.'
'What about the Doctor?'
'So far, so good. We're getting it all on tape, sir.'
The Squadron Leader moaned and stirred into consciousness.
'Excellent, Sergeant. Stand by...'



The Squadron Leader stared up at the hazy figure and blinked dizzily. 'I'm... I'm
Bradwell, sir...' he stammered, trying to get to his feet and collapsing back into the
chair. '... Were we attacked...?' he mumbled, attempting a salute.

The Brigadier waved away formality. 'Just you relax and try to clear your head,
Squadron Leader,' he ordered gently. "Then I'll fill you in.'

Twenty minutes later most of the bunker personnel had revived and Bradwell
was gazing incredulously at the Brigadier.

'But it's utterly fantastic...' he gasped as Lethbridge-Stewart finished the hurried
briefing.

'But true I'm afraid, Bradwell. We're expecting the invasion fleet at any moment.
If they get here intact we've all had it.'

The Squadron Leader stumbled groggily over to the radar screens. 'See anything,
Peters?'

'Not a glimmer so far, sir,' responded the Flight Lieutenant manning the main
scanner, rubbing his temples tenderly.

'We could be too late,' murmured the Brigadier.
Zoe joined them. 'What's the maximum radar range?' she asked.
'Pretty accurate to about ten thousand miles, miss. Dodgy outside that,' Peters

replied.
'Then we won't see them until they're almost on top of us,' she sighed

downheartedly.
'All the same, we can certainly arrange a little reception committee for them,'

Bradwell muttered, turning briskly to his team.
'Begin fuel priming and countdown prelims...' he ordered.
While the pre-launch procedures were smoothly completed, the Brigadier called

the Ops Room on the polyvox again.
'Has Turner reached Nykortny Base yet?' he demanded impatiently.
'No word yet, sir.' Walters smartly replied. 'Something now!'
shouted Flight Lieutenant Peters.
'Just on range limit, sir. Faint but closing very fast.' The Brigadier rushed over

to the radar display. 'This it?' he asked curtly.
'Looks like it, sir...' said Bradwell, pointing out a dim group of white dots near

the edge of the main screen.
Peters keyed in a command and a complex of symbols was superimposed on the

display. 'They're on a ballistic trajectory, sir... in range approximately five minutes
from now.'

'Where are we on prelims?' snapped Bradwell.
'T minus forty five seconds, sir,' called a voice from the launching section.
' Hold!' rapped Bradwell.
There was a rapid succession of shouts and acknowledgements.
'Holding at T minus forty-five, sir.'
'Prepare fuse locks and run arming code...' Bradwell ordered, going to his desk

on the dais.
Zoe peered at the radar. 'Look! There are more of the things now.'
'Arming codes running..



There's hundreds of them now!' shouted Peters.
Squadron Leader Bradwell turned to the Brigadier. 'We can't possibly take out

all of them, sir.'
Lethbridge-Stewart nodded stoically. 'Just get as many as you can...' he said

quietly.
Behind Bradwell the computer discs and spools whirred busily.
'Link programme to telemetry guidance,' he commanded.
Zoe had been carefully studying the host of invasion craft on the screen. 'I think

you could knock out a good ninety percent of these things,' she announced
unexpectedly.

'Nowhere near enough Taktiks,' snapped Bradwell, absorbed in his checking
schedule.

Zoe bridled at his dismissive manner. 'It's no use just blowing up half a dozen
or so,' she persisted. 'Those things are in tight formation patterns. If you guide each
missile carefully I'm sure you could set up a chain reaction.'

Bradwell considered for a moment, and then shook his head.
'There isn't time to compute all the variables, miss. The things will be on us any

minute now.'
Zoe grabbed the Brigadier by the arm. 'I know I can do it. Just give me thirty

seconds,' she begged.
Bradwell looked at her as if she were mad. He glanced at the Brigadier who

looked unhappy and undecided.
Then Lethbridge-Stewart remembered the Doctor's words about the girl's

extraordinary capabilities with computers. 'All right,'
he sighed. 'Give her thirty seconds.'
Flight Lieutenant Peters swung round in alarm. 'Sir, doesn't give us much time

to...'
'Revised countdown to begin at T minus forty five in thirty seconds from... now!'

Bradwell interrupted.
Zoewas already at theGuidance ProgrammeVDU, calling up data and scribbling

feverishly on a notepad. Bradwell tapped his fingers impatiently on his console and the
Brigadier fiddled anxiously with the polyvox unit while they waited for the outcome
of Zoe's calculations. At last she ripped a sheet off the pad and thrust it at Bradwell.

'Enter this into the guidance programme!' she urged him confidently.
Bradwell glanced at the list of numbers The had scribbled and then handed it

to the Guidance Programmer. 'You'd better be right, miss.... he frowned, as the man
began furiously typing at the keyboard.

'T minus forty five seconds from... Now!' Bradwell ordered, returning to his
console.

Once again the systems buzzed into life and the discs and tapes spun madly
back and forth. The Squadron Leader inserted a key into his console. 'T minus thirty
seconds... No hold-ups now, please,' he prayed, his eyes flicking over the check
panels. 'T minus ten.... He turned the key decisively.

'Data accepted, sir!' someone reported.
Zoe folded her arms and crossed her fingers. The Brigadier stared at the vast

invasion fleet spread across the radar scanners.
'Three... two... one... Fire!' Bradwell pressed a button.



Out on the airfield, the small compact missiles streaked out of their silos in
groups of ten and vanished immediately into the haze.

Inside the bunker, everyone crowded round the radar screens and held their
breath. There was a long, agonising pause while teleprinters chattered out ballistic
data and guidance details, but all eyes were on the multitude of white blobs on the
radar.

Suddenly, one by one, and then in gradually increasing numbers, the blobs began
to vanish from the screens as the Cyber fleet was blown to smithereens just above
the Earth's atmosphere...

The Doctor had been keeping as quiet and unobtrusive as possible while he
watched the titanic struggle of wills between Vaughn and the Cyber Module.

'You have betrayed us, Vaughn,' shrieked the machine. 'The Transporter Fleet
has been attacked and virtually destroyed.'

'That is not possible,' Vaughn protested vehemently. 'You are trying to blackmail
me.'

'You have failed, Vaughn. We shall take control now.'
Desperately Vaughn sought for some delaying tactic. 'Give me time. I can deal

with the saboteurs,' he pleaded.

The Module sparked angily. 'There is no more time.'
Vaughn's eyes betrayed his bluff. 'I will not allow the invasion to proceed unless

I control it,' he boasted.
The machine paused as if listening, its crystal bristling with millions of brilliant

pinpoints of light. 'We no longer require your services, Vaughn,' it screeched. 'We
shall dispatch a Megatron Bomb. We shall destroy every living thing...'

The Doctor went ashen. 'A Megatron Bomb!' he gasped. 'So this is your great
vision, Vaughn... to be master of a dead world.'

All remnants of Vaughan's confident and complacent charm finally dissolved
under theDoctor's scornful gaze. In an instant he shrank into a spiteful, whining dwarf.
'You can't destroy the world,'

he screamed at the Cyber Module. 'What about me?'
The Module crackled menacingly. 'You are superfluous, Vaughn. The invasion

will succeed. The bomb will be dispatched forthwith.'
Vaughan laughed manically. 'You'll destroy your own Cybermen here.'
'The sacrifice will be small,' rasped the machine. Vaughn kicked the desk like a

petulant child. 'I won't allow it!' he shrieked, red-faced and trembling.
'You cannot stop us, Vaughn.'
The Doctor went over to the almost hysterical figure. 'Now perhaps you'll believe

the truth. You cannot make bargains with Cybermen,' he muttered grimly.
Vaughn shoved him aside. Seizing the Cerebration Machine from the desk he

advanced on the alcove. 'You think you're indestructible...' he sneered. 'But I can
destroy you... all of you.' He touched some switches and trained the projection horn
of the device directly at the glittering crystal.

The Professor's machine emitted its clicking and then its piercing whistling noise
and the Cyber Module immediately began to vibrate and strobe crazily.



'Opposition is futile...' it croaked, as smoke began to belch from its melting
connections. Trickles of liquified metal ran in rivulets down the vacuum tubes and
they started imploding, with sharp glass splinters flying everywhere.

Vaughn gloated over the disintegrating apparatus like some insane magician.
Boosting the output of the quivering device in his hands, he laughed in a crazed,
hollow voice.

The Doctor did his best to wrest the machine out of his grasp, but Vaughn simply
nudged him aside, yelling at the top of his voice:

'I'll destroy them all... I'll destroy them all...'
'Turn it off, man!' the Doctor shouted. 'You're going to blow us all sky high.'
Suddenly there was a gigantic ripping sound and the crystal broke into millions

of tiny fragments. Vaughn and the Doctor were hurled back against the desk and the
Doctor managed to wrench the Cerebration Machine awayfrom Vaughn and turn it
off. A flurry of smaller explosions burst out like firecrackers, scattering debris all
over the office.

When the smoke finally cleared, all that remained of the Cyber Module was a
shapeless mess of twisted silicon and glass and a tangle of swollen and slit-open wires
smouldering poisonously in the gloom.

Zoe was lifted shoulder-high and cheered by the enthusiastic bunker personnel.
'Knocked every single one for six!' exclaimed Squadron Leader Bradwell. 'Quite

fantastic. How did you do it, miss?'
Zoe shrugged coolly. 'All quite logical really. Just a question of speed, mass,

angle of descent, angular density... Stuff like that,'
she smiled.
'Can we keep her, sir? She's much prettier than a computer,'
Bradwell laughed.
The Brigadier shook Zoe's hand. 'Well done. Jolly good show,'
he said with a sombre smile.
All at once Benton's distorted voice buzzed from the polyvox in the Brigadier's

pocket.
Lethbridge-Stewart whipped it out. 'What's the flap?' he demanded.
'We overheard something on the polyvox from Vaughn's place, sir... Apparently

the Cyberforce is going to fire some sort of bomb at the Earth. It's called a Megatron
or something. Could wipe us all out...'

The Brigadier cast his eyes wearily up to the ceiling. 'So all our efforts here mean
nothing...' he muttered through clenched teeth.

A dismal silence fell over the blockhouse.
The Brigadier rallied himself with an attempt at morale boosting. 'Where there's

a will...' he muttered. 'Right, Benton, tell the Wing Commander to prepare for take-
off. We're coming back over at once. Out.'

'We'll keep in touch on this open line,' he told Bradwell, handing him the polyvox
unit, 'then you'll know what's going on.

You might try and get a fix on that bomb...' he added doubtfully.
Bradwell grinned. 'Don't worry, Brigadier. If we do, we'll try and set it off on

its way in!'



With a nod of thanks to the bunker crew, the Brigadier led Zoe and his UNIT
squad back to the Hercules out on the runway.

Gradually Vaughn's manic laughter died away and he leaned on the desk
muttering agitatedly. 'It's dead, Doctor... It's dead... I killed it...'

'But you haven't destroyed the Cyberforce,' the Doctor earnestly reminded him.
'They are still out there, preparing to obliterate your planet.'

'Five years work, Doctor, and all gone in less than five seconds.'
The Doctor seized Vaughn by the shoulders and shook him vigorously. 'Listen

to me,' he persisted. 'You must switch off the ion beam. No doubt the Cyberforce will
try to use it to trigger the Megatron Bomb!'

Vaughn stared blankly back at him, his mouth forming inaudible words.
'We are both allies now,' the Doctor argued forcefully. 'Both fighting for our

lives. You must stop the beam.'
Hazily Vaughn focussed on the Doctor's wildly persuasive eyes. 'The ion beam...

yes... Packer must switch...' He moved slowly round the desk like a sleepwalker and
touched a button.

The monitor screens lit up. On several of them loomed the stark silver images
of Cybermen.

'Packer... Packer... where are you...?' Vaughn cried in a strangled voice into the
microphone.

At that moment the door slid aside and Packer burst into the office. 'Vaughn...
what have you done?' he screamed. 'They... the Cybermen have taken over... They
won't obey... They've killed several...' he whipped round gaping in terror at the open
door.

'They're coming after us...'
Then Packer took in the devastation still smouldering in the alcove. He flew at

Vaughn screaming uncontrollably: 'What have you done to us...?'
Before Vaughn could react, a Cyberman appeared in the doorway. Packer

snatched out his pistol and emptied the magazine into the monster's rasping chest
grille. Then Vaughn dived behind the desk and the Doctor seized the Cerebration
Machine and scampered into the smoking alcove. The Cyberman's laser unit emitted
a series of blinding flashes and Packer's body seemed to alternate from positive to
negative in the blistering discharge. His uniform erupted into flames and his exposed
skin crinkled and fused like melted toffee papers.

From the alcove, the Doctor aimed the projection horn and switched to full
power, shutting his eyes and mentally muffling his ears against the intolerable
whistling from Watkins's sinister apparatus. The Cyberman took a few lurching
strides towards him and then slowly folded over like a broken doll with viscous smoke
spurting from its joints and shrill metallic screams from its slit mouth.

With a grunt of congratulation to the absent Professor for the efficiency of his
device, the Doctor switched it off and put in on the desk. Then he pulled the trembling
Vaughn to his feet.

'Where is the ion beam control?' he demanded.
'We can't fight them...' Vaughn whimpered, gazing down at Packer's hideously

incinerated body.



'Where? Where do we switch off the beam?' the Doctor repeated, shaking
Vaughn.

'At the compound. But they'll be there too...' Vaughn murmured.
The Doctor took out the polyvox unit. 'Brigadier, can you hear me?'
'Affirmative, Doctor. We heard everything. What do you want us to do?' rapped

Lethbridge-Stewart
'There are two possibilities,' the Doctor hurriedly explained.
'Either we switch off the ion beam or we destroy the Cyber Mother Craft...'
'Well, Doctor, Captain Turner reports that the Russians are cooperating

magnificently, but it'll take at least ten hours for their rocket to reach the Cyber ship.'
The Doctor drummed his fingers, anxiously along the casing of the polyvox unit

as if it were a penny whistle. 'But their bomb could be sent at any moment, Brigadier.
The ion beam's our only hope.'

He turned to Vaughn. 'Will you help us to cut off the beam?' he pleaded. 'We'll
never do it in time unless you help us.'

Vaughn gazed at him cynically. 'Why should I help you?'
'To save the world, Vaughn.'
Vaughn laughed. 'And if I survive, Doctor... What future have I? What will the

world do with me now?' he scoffed wearily.
The Doctor glared fiercely up at him. 'For goodness sake, stop thinking about

yourself,' he shouted. 'Think of all those millions out there...'
Vaughn regained a trace of his old bland composure.
'Appealing to my better nature, Doctor?' he smiled. Then his face hardened. 'No.

If I help you it will be because I hate the Cybermen.'
He turned and gazed out over the sunlit city. 'I know you think I'm insane, that

I want power for its own sake. But you're wrong. The world is weak, a chaos of
conflicting ideals. It needs a strong, single-minded leader. I was to be that leader...'
His voice broke with emotion.

'Vaughn!' the Doctor begged him.
Vaughn turned round. 'I'll help you,' he agreed in a dead voice.
'But only because they destroyed my vision, my dream.'

Vaughn walked like an automaton over to the Cerebration Machine, stepping
unseeingly over Packer's corpse. 'We must get to the compound at once,' he said
mechanically.

The Brigadier's voice buzzed out again. 'Doctor, we have a chopper in the area.
Can you get onto the roof?'

'Yes, Brigadier. We're on our way now. Up and away...'
'Out, Doctor.'
Vaughn picked up the Professor's device. 'Your UNIT friends are most efficient,

Doctor, but we shall need this. The Cybermen will be guarding the ion transmitter.'
Eyeing the apparatus warily, the Doctor cautiously followed his unexpected ally

to the elevator.

10



The Nick of Time

As theHercules lumbered into the sky and turned slowly north-east, the Brigadier
marshalled his scanty forces for a desperate last stand against the Cyberforce and their
Armageddon device - the Megatron Bomb.

'Where are we off to now?' marvelled Isobel, joining Zoe in the Operations
Room.

'Reinforcing the Doctor. He's going to fight his way through a couple of hundred
Cybermen.'

'Golly,' cried Isobel, her eyes shining with admiration.
'I've only got a platoon,' Lethbridge-Stewart reminded them.
'No time to find more neuristors and revive more of my men.'
Just then Captain Turner came through on the radio. 'The Russians have just

launched their rocket,' he reported faintly from the Nykortny Base. 'Supercooled
Hydrogen Warhead. Should do the trick, sir.'

'If it gets there in time,' murmured the Brigadier pessimistically. Keepme posted,
Jimmy.' The Brigadier shook his head and laughed drily. 'An American warhead stuck
onto a Russian missile... There's hope for the world if only we can save it now...' he
mused.

Immediately afterwards, the Doctor was heard on the polyvox unit shouting
above the roar of the helicopter which had picked him and Vaughn off the roof of the
International Electromatix Headquarters.

'Brigadier! We're about to land in the compound. We I must go straight in, I'm
afraid.'

'That's madness, Doctor. We're right behind you. Wait for us.'
'Don't worry, Brig, we've gotWatkins's machine,' retorted the Doctor. 'It's proved

most effective against Cybermen so far.'
Lethbridge-Stewart realised it was useless to object. 'If you insist, Doctor.'

'Vaughn says the ion beam is transmitted from the blockhouse under the three
spherical antennae shrouds.'

'They look like three giant golf balls,' added Zoe helpfully.
'Roger, Doctor.'
'Down and out,' cried the Doctor as the helicopter began its descent.
'Infuriating man!' muttered the Brigadier to himself, glaring at the polyvox unit.
The cockpit intercom clicked on. 'Ten minutes to touchdown in Red Sector One,'

announced the Wing Commander.
The Brigadier turned to Corporal Benton. 'Alert assault platoon for immediate

disembarkation!' he snapped.
Zoe and Isobel edged forward. 'Can we come with you?' asked Zoe.
'Please. It'll be my last chance to photograph Cybermen,' Isobel added. 'Golly,

what a scoop!'
The Brigadier shook his head resolutely. Then he looked them up and down. 'I

don't know about a scoop...' he muttered, relenting.
'But I suppose the archives in Geneva will be glad of...' He paused and grinned.

'Just keep out of my way, that's all.'



Vaughn clasped the Cerebration Mentor to his chest as he and the Doctor ran
through themaze of buildings forming the factory complex, making their way towards
the distant blockhouse under the three spherical antennae shrouds. They had
successfully dodged patrolling Cybermen, but suddenly one of them appeared
abruptly round a corner, striding inexorably towards them. Vaughn stopped and
carefully aimed the apparatus at it. At once the Doctor grabbed his arm and dragged
him into a doorway out of sight.

'What do you think you're doing?' Vaughn muttered distrustfully. 'We must
destroy them...'

The Doctor peered warily round the corner. 'They don't know we're here yet.
Let's keep the element of surprise.' He looked again.

'All clear now.'
Reluctantly Vaughn agreed and they crept along the side of the enormous

building and started to run down a narrow alleyway. Just ahead of them a door opened
and they were confronted by two silver giants completely blocking their escape.
Vaughn aimed and triggered the machine. A shrill whistling bored into their heads
and the two Cybermen performed a hideously comic semaphore of jerking limbs, with
smoke and black fluid-like pus oozing from their joints and grilles.

'Now they'll know we're here,' lamented the Doctor as they clambered over the
hot, smoking carcasses and rushed on down the alley.

Reaching the end, Vaughn indicated the roofs of a group of derelict buildings
opposite. 'We can go up that way...' he panted, racing across a yard to a rusted fire
escape.

The corroded structure creaked and wobbled as they stumbled round and round
the spiral staircase and onto the roof twenty metres above the concrete. Dodging
between the shattered skylights, rusted ventilator cowls and sagging beams, theymade
for the other end of the vast ruin. Vaughn paused to look over the edge and then
opened a steel door in the head of a shaft.

The Doctor peered into the unwelcoming darkness. 'Is this the only way?' he
asked unenthusiastically.

'It is now,' Vaughn told him. 'The Cybermen are all around us already.'
Before following Vaughn down into the gloom, the Doctor scanned the sky

hopefully. But there was no sign of the Brigadier's forces. He glanced over the parapet.
Cybermen were striding across the small yard and along the alleyways far below.
With a brave shrug he started down the echoing concrete steps.

The UNIT taskforce screeched to a halt in the compound and leaped from their
jeeps.

'There are the golf ball things,' shouted the Brigadier, 'over that way through the
old buildings..

Zoe and Isobel ran along behind him. Isobel was laden with camera, lenses and
rolls of film.

They made their way through a deserted old factory building and were about to
cross the yard beyond it when the Brigadier ordered the force to take cover behind
the inert and decaying machinery.

Silhouetted against the sunlit open doorway stood four Cybermen, their huge
shadows stretching across the floor. The UNIT



platoon concentrated its machine-gun fire on the advancing enemy, but it had no
effect whatsoever. Then the Cybermen's laser units flashed with intense blue light and
two troopers were flung against the corrugated steel wall of the factory amid splinters
of wooden crate.

'Bazookas! Where the hell are you?' yelled the Brigadier, glancing over his
shoulder at two groups of soldiers frantically setting up a pair of anti-tank launchers
behind a massive lathe.

'Fire at will!' he ordered, grabbing Isobel as she tried to take a telephoto shot of
their assailants and dragging her back beside Zoe behind a huge steel pipe.

All at once there was a roar and a searing whoosh as the bazookas fired. The
Cybermen were hurled cartwheeling and disintegrating out of the building by two
devastating explosions.

'Advance!' ordered Lethbridge-Stewart, leading the way.
Isobel could not resist stopping for a moment to photograph the tangled remnants

of the Cybermen. 'Great!' she murmured, her motorised shutter zipping madly away.
'Come on!' Zoe urged her. 'That's only four of the monsters.'
They followed the troopers across the yard and into the alleyway opposite.

Vaughn and the Doctor froze momentarily as the sound of muffled explosions
rumbled through the semi-darkness inside the old powerhouse.

'That'll be the Brig,' the Doctor murmured with satisfaction as he followed
Vaughn among the eerie ghosts of the heavy machinery.

Eventually Vaughn forced open a small door and they emerged into a narrow
road running alongside the windowless blockhouse containing the ion beam
generator. Vaughn pointed up at the flat roof under the three shrouded antennae.

'That's the best way into the building,' he advised. 'Take them by surprise.'
The Doctor glanced cautiously round the edge of the door. 'It's very odd, Vaughn.

There don't seem to be any Cybermen here at all.'

Vaughn indicated the corpses of several security guards lying near the entrance
to the blockhouse. 'No doubt they are all inside, Doctor,' he murmured. 'I'll go up there
first and cover you.'

The Doctor waited while Vaughn clambered up the fire escape at the corner of
the transmitter building. When he reached the top, the Doctor edged out into the road
and scuttled across to the foot of the stairs. As he reached the corner, three Cybermen
suddenly emerged from the open door of the powerhouse where he had been
crouching seconds earlier.

'Behind you, Vaughn!' he yelled, dodging round the corner out of sight under
the metal stairs.

Above him, Vaughn spun round aiming the Professor's machine awkwardly over
the handrail. As the intense whistling ripped the air, one of the Cybermen collapsed in
a heap of wobbling limbs and tubes. Before Vaughn could adjust the direction of the
horn, the other two Cybermen discharged their laser units simultaneously. Vaughn
was instantly transformed into a pillar of fire, flickering rapidly from positive to
negative. He flung the Cerebration Machine high into the air and it smashed asunder
at the Doctor's feet in a cascade of delicate components. Vaughn's terrible death took
several-seconds as he flailed about in a vortex of strobing white flames.



Crouching beneath the fire escape, the Doctor's blood ran cold as he listened
to Vaughn's final agonised screams... They were the sounds not of a human but of
a Cyberman. When he looked up eventually, the Doctor felt a rain of fine black ash
on his face.

Rubbing his watering eyes, the Doctor peered round the corner. The second
Cyberman had now collapsed on top of the first, but the third monster was advancing
across the road towards him.

Glancing behind him, the Doctor saw that the alley formed a dead end. The
hissing rubbery breaths were only metres away. Swallowing hard, the Doctor waited
at the corner. As soon as the creature appeared, he dived forward between its legs and
raced towards the powerhouse door.

At the far end of the road, the Brigadier and his troops saw the disorientated
Cyberman trying to disentangle itself from the railing of the fire escape. Behind it, a
tiny figure scurried into the powerhouse.

'There's the Doctor!' cried Zoe.
'Bazookas!' snapped Lethbridge-Stewart.
Seconds later a roar burst from the launcher and the Cyberman was blown to

pieces in the middle of the roadway.
After a pause the Doctor crept out from the doorway. 'Where on earth have you

been?' he yelled. Then he pointed to the blockhouse. '"I'he ion beam transmitter's in
there... Do get a move on...'

Led by the Brigadier, the platoon and the girls tore down the road to the
blockhouse. After a brief consultation with the Doctor, the Brigadier ran up the fire
escape, clambered over Vaughn's welded corpse and onto the roof. Armed with her
camera, Isobel tried to follow him, but the Doctor caught her and dragged her under
the fire escape. Several troopers clattered after the Brigadier and the others surrounded
the blockhouse with levelled machine-guns.

After a long silence they heard a tinkle of glass followed by several grenade
explosions. The door of the blockhouse was blown off and a number of Cybermen
staggered out to be greeted by a hail of machine-gun fire.

Isobel wriggled out of the Doctor's grasp and took a series of hurried pictures
of the heap of wriggling, gasping aliens scattered over the roadway. More massive
explosions followed and more Cybermen tottered into the dense barrage of bullets
and collapsed twitching and smouldering on top of the others.

There was a long silence. At last the Brigadier staggered out, coughing and
wiping his blackened face to hearty cheers from his men. He found the Doctor posing
heroically on the fire escape, flourishing bits of dismembered Cyberman while Isobel
snapped cheerfully away.

'When you're quite ready, Doctor...' he gasped resentfully, 'we have an invasion
on our hands.'

The Doctor grinned cheekily at him. 'Oh really, Brig? It looks like soot to me!'

In the Henlow Flats bunker, Squadron Leader Bradwell and his team listened to
the Brigadier's Situation Bulletin on the polyvox unit while keeping their eyes fixed
on the radar scanners for any sign of the CyberMother Ship or of theMegatron Bomb.



'... By destroying the ion beam transmitter we have stopped the enemy triggering
their bomb. However, their Cybership continues to transmit its hypnotic signal and
therefore the world remains paralysed,' explained Lethbridge-Stewart. 'To stop this
signal we must eliminate the Cybership. The Russian rocket should reach it in... in
approximately six hours. If the warhead succeeds then humanity will be released from
Cyber coercion and we shall be able to mobilise International Defences against the
Cybermen already on the Earth...'

'Something on the screen, sir!' called out Flight Lieutenant Peters. 'It's coming
in very fast.'

Bradwell hurried over. On the edge of the long-range sky radar was a large white
blob. 'Sure it's not noise, Peters?'

'No, sir, it's there all right. True orbital path. Must be gigantic.'
Bradwell snatched up the polyvox. 'It must be the Cyber craft,'
he murmured.
'It's in a holding orbit, sir. Approximately five thousand miles.'
The Squadron Leader apologised for interrupting the Brigadier. 'We've picked

up an enormous UFO, sir. It's orbiting about five thousand miles out.'
'Outside your range I suppose?' asked the Brigadier despondently.
'Oh yes, sir. Anyway we've only got some odds and ends left.
We chucked all our best stuff at the earlier lot.'
Lethbridge-Stewart grunted. 'Very well. Thank you, Bradwell.
Inform me of any change. Out.'

In the Operations Room inside the Hercules the atmosphere was fraught with
anxiety. The Brigadier told Benton to contact Captain Turner at the Nykortny Base
in Russia. Then he turned to the Doctor, who was silently brooding by himself.

'Why the devil would they move their Mother Ship in to a closer orbit?' he asked,
completely mystified.

The Doctor roused himself. 'No doubt to deliver their bomb,'
he mused.
'But Doctor, we've destroyed the ion beam transmitter... so how...?'
The Doctor sighed. 'I must have been mistaken,' he confessed.
'Evidently the device does not require an ion field. However, if as I suspect it is

highly unstable, then it must be confined within a giant magnetic field until shortly
before detonation. Therefore it could hardly be fired by missile from the
neighbourhood of the Moon some 230,000 miles away..

'You mean the magnetic field has to be generated inside the Mother Ship?' Zoe
blurted out.

The Doctor nodded gloomily. 'Precisely, Zoe. So they have come in closer to
Earth and are presumably about to launch the Megatron Bomb.'

'So they must have come in range of the Russian missile!'
exclaimed Zoe excitedly.
'Indeed, Zoe, but unfortunately travelling in the wrong direction.'
The Brigadier put up his hand for silence as Captain Turner's voice at last came

through. 'Sorry about the delay, sir, but we've had an almighty flap on here...'
'Can the Russians re-direct their rocket, Jimmy?' demanded the Brigadier

urgently, his eyes fixed on the Doctor's.



'Yes, they already have, sir. Estimate contact with Cyber craft in fifteen minutes.'
The Brigadier glanced at his watch. 'Could the Cybermen deliver their bomb in

that time?' he asked the Doctor.
The Doctor nodded, gripping Zoe's hand protectively. 'Easily, I'm afraid.'
The Brigadier thanked Turner and sank into a chair. 'This is going to be a long

fifteen minutes...' he sighed.

They sat in agonised silence, waiting. Once Benton knocked a tin mug flying
and it clattered under the radio console, making everyone jump. The hapless Corporal
mumbled his apologies sheepishly.

After a seemingly eternal vigil Squadron Leader Bradwell's excited voice burst
from the polyvox receiver. 'We have the Russian rocket on radar, heading right on
target, sir.'

Then a chorus of urgent voices was heard in the background.
'Now we've got a third echo sir, heading away from the Cyber ship!'
Bradwell shouted above the hubbub in the bunker.
The Doctor stood up, frantically ruffling his mop of hair as he glanced at Zoe in

despair. 'The Megatron Bomb...' he whispered. 'It's on its way after all...'

In the bunker at Henlow Flats Squadron Leader Bradwell stared at the three
traces on the radar screen. The small trace of the Russian rocket was fast approaching
the large blob of the Cyber Mother Craft. A third echo, the Megatron Bomb, was
moving rapidly away from the Mother Ship and towards the centre of the screen.

'Prime all remaining Taktiks,' he suddenly rapped out.
'Override checks programme and link into skyprobe radar guidance.'
'Target trajectory linked...' reported Peters. 'In range thirty seconds. You think

this will work, sir?'
'No idea, but we've got nothing to lose,' Bradwell cried cheerfully, the light of

battle shining in his eyes. 'Guidance locked on yet?'
'Best we can, sir, on all three missiles.'
Bradwell turned the key in his command console. 'Right. One at a time... Three...

two... one... Fire!' He stabbed the launch button with crossed fingers.
The bunker crew waited tensely.
'One's going wide, sir...' Peters called out.
'Prepare Two and standby Three, just in case.'

On the other side of the airfield the two remaining missiles had swung their slim
black noses up at the sky. Seconds later one of them streaked away into the blue.

'Two looks good, sir,' Peters reported.
On the radar scanner the Taktik missile was soon seen homing in directly on the

Megatron Bomb missile, while far beyond them the Russian rocket was now almost
touching the Cyber Mother Ship.

'Bradwell, what the devil's going on over there?' the Brigadier suddenly boomed
from the polyvox unit.

At that moment a frenzied cheer erupted in the bunker.
'Bradwell...? This is Lethbridge-Stewart. I demand to know what's happening...'



Another even bigger cheer and whoops of delight filled the bunker as the airmen
hugged one another and shookhands.

Bradwell picked up the polyvox. 'Two bullseyes, sir!' he reported, laughing with
relief as he gazed at the tracer sweeping back and forth across the blank radar screen.

'Not a trace of 'em left.'
While the Brigadier's and the Doctor's hearty congratulations buzzed out of the

polyvox unit, Bradwell reached under his collar and gingerly removed the depolariser
taped to his neck. It had begun to itch...

Two days later, Zoe was once again posing under the hot lights in Isobel's
improvised studio. This time she was wearing a black catsuit and her hair was covered
in silver glitter, while Isobel looked cool and relaxed in orange hotpants and silver
boots.

'What exactly is this new job you've landed?' Zoe asked, taking a well deserved
breather.

'It's super,' Isobel grinned. 'Because of all my action photos of the Cybermen
I've got an exclusive contract with a magazine to do a worldwide exclusive on the
invasion! What about you, Zoe?'

Zoe screwed up her face. 'Oh, I suppose when the Doctor's finished repairing the
TARDIS circuits we'll be off again,' she replied regretfully.

Isobel looked sad. 'Where to?'
Zoe shrugged. 'We never know where to... or when to, come to that,' she replied

mysteriously.
The door burst open and Captain Turner popped in.
'Here's my dolly soldier at last,' cried Isobel.
'Cheeky!' grinned Turner. 'Zoe, the Doctor's ready to leave.
I've got the jeep outside.'
Zoe looked a little downcast. 'Oh, any news of Jamie?' she asked.

'He's fine, Zoe. We'll pick him up from the hospital on the way.'
Isobel nudged Turner mischievously. 'Could I come too?'
Turner hesitated. 'Okay, as long as you promise not to call me your "dolly

soldier" in front of the Brig,' he warned her sternly.
They all laughed and he led the way outside.

An hour later, the Doctor, Zoe, Jamie, Isobel, Captain Turner and the Brigadier
all climbed out of a UNIT jeep parked beside a gate leading into a field.

'Here, Doctor?' exclaimed Lethbridge-Stewart, surveying the leisurely cowswith
some misgiving.

'Yes, thank you, Brigadier, this is fine,' smiled the Doctor, opening the gate. He
turned and shook hands warmly.

Jamie limped up and frowned. 'Och, are ye sure this is the place, Doctor?'
The Doctor shielded his eyes with the two repaired circuit panels and surveyed

the placid rural scene. 'Yes, Jamie. Don't you recognise that cow over there?'
They followed his arm and gaped in astonishment. Half the cow seemed to be

missing - only its head and forelegs were visible.
The Doctor chuckled. 'The TARDIS must be just over there.
Come on you two, all aboard.'



Hemarched across the lush grass andwent up to the half-invisible cow. He patted
its head tenderly and then took a few steps towards where its tail should have been
and promptly disappeared.

Immediately his head reappeared just above the cow's head.
'I've found the TARDIS!' he cried. 'Hang on a minute while I put the circuits

back.' Again the Doctor disappeared.
'What the devil's the fellow up to?' muttered the Brigadier scratching his head,

while Zoe and Jamie exchanged a grin.
A few minutes later, the TARDIS materialised with fitful flashes of its yellow

beacon and shrill grindings from its innermost mechanism.
'A disappearing police box!' gasped Isobel, opening her camera case. 'I don't

believe this...'

The door opened and the Doctor emerged. 'Come along, you two!' he shouted.
'We're five hundred years late already.'

Zoe and Jamie bade farewell to the amazed and bewildered group at the gate and
walked off arm in arm towards the shabby police box. Isobel clicked eagerly away as
the intrepid trio stood waving in the doorway of the TARDIS, with the Doctor posing
dramatically for the telephoto lens. At last the door squeaked shut.

Isobel, Captain Turner and the Brigadier leaned on the gate and laughed as the
cows suddenly looked up and scattered in all directions mooing loudly. With a hoarse
trumpeting and groaning sound the battered police box faded and finally vanished
completely.

'Where do you think they've gone, sir?' asked Turner, shaking his head in puzzled
disbelief.

The Brigadier watched the cows as they gradually resumed their quiet grazing.
Then he shrugged. 'It's a moot point, Jimmy,' he said and marched briskly back to
the jeep.



Table of Contents
Prologue