In theory the TARDIS should be able to change
its appearance to blend in unobtrusively
wherever it happens to materialise. In practice,
however, because of a fault in the chameleon
circuit, it always looks like a police box – a
minor inconvenience the Doctor now hopes to
correct.
Fixing the mechanism involves a trip to Earth
and a trip to the planet Logopolis – normally
a quiet little place that keeps itself to itself.
But on this occasion the meddling presence of
the Doctor’s archenemy, the Master, ensures
the disruption of normality. And even the
Master is horrified by the threat of total chaos
he unintentionally precipitates – until he finds
a way to turn the imminent destruction of the
universe to his own advantage . . .

DOCTORWHO



LOGOPOLIS

Based on the BBC television serial by Christopher
H. Bidmead by arrangement with the British Broadcasting
Corporation

Christopher H. Bidmead

A TARGET BOOK
published by
the Paperback Division of
W. H. ALLEN & Co. Ltd

A Target Book
Published in 1982
By the Paperback Division of
W.H. Allen & Co. Ltd
A Howard & Wyndham Company
44 Hill Street, London W1X 8LB

First published in Great Britain by
W.H. Allen & Co. Ltd 1982
Novelisation copyright © Christopher H. Bidmead 1982
Original Script copyright © Christopher H. Bidmead
‘Doctor Who’ series copyright © British Broadcasting
Corporation 1981, 1982
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Cox and Wyman Ltd, Reading

ISBN 0 426 20149 3



This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or
otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated without the publisher's
prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the
subsequent purchaser.



1

Events cast shadows before them, but the huger shadows creep over us unseen.
When some great circumstance, hovering somewhere in the future, is a catastrophe
of incalculable consequence, you may not see the signs in the small happenings that
go before. The Doctor did, however - vaguely.

While the Doctor paced back and forth in the TARDIS cloister room trying to
make some sense of the tangle of troublesome thoughts that had followed him from
Traken, in a completely different sector of the Universe, in a place called Earth, one
such small foreshadowing was already beginning to unfold. It was a simple thing. A
policeman leaned his bicycle against a police box, took a key from the breast pocket
of his uniform jacket and unlocked the little telephone door to make a phone call.

Police Constable Donald Seagrave was in a jovial mood. The sun was shining,
the bicycle was performing perfectly since its overhaul last Saturday afternoon, and
now that the water-main flooding in Burney Street was repaired he was on his way
home for tea, if that was all right with the Super.

It seemed to be a bad line. Seagrave could hear his Superintendent at the far end
saying, 'Speak up . . . Who's that . . .?', but there was this whirring noise, and then a
sort of chuffing and groaning . . .

The baffled constable looked into the telephone, and then banged it on his helmet
to try to improve the connection. If his attention hadn't been so engaged with the
receiver he might have noticed a distinct wobble coming over the police box. Its blue
surface shimmered momentarily and grew bluer. The whirring sound stopped, but
then so did the voice at the other end as the line went dead. The constable looked
ruefully at the telephone. Now he would have to cycle all the way back to the station
and get permission from the Super personally, by which time the sun would doubtless
be gone and with it the prospect of a relaxing afternoon in the garden potting out the
sweet-peas

. . .

This speculation was the constable's last thought in this world. As he replaced
the receiver his face was suddenly slammed up against the blue door, as if - but that
was impossible - something inside the box had grabbed his hand.

His arm disappeared up to the shoulder. His head lolled back, the eyes staring.
As the throttled, terminal gasp bubbled away to a whisper in his throat, from inside
the box echoed the light delicate sound of a chuckle.

The TARDIS was full of surprises, but Adric wasn't ready for what he saw when
he turned the corner.



Suddenly he seemed to be in the open air, in a sort of crumbling stone courtyard,
with a floor unevenly flagged with stone slabs. A few small twisted trees grew up
between the flagstones, and beyond them the boy caught the crimson flash of the
familiar flapping coat. At least he had found the Doctor.

Adric was about to call to him when he was stopped by the solemnity with which
the Doctor was pacing the pillared walk that flanked the quadrangle. His strange
companion seemed deeply troubled.

The Doctor must have sensed that he wasn't alone, because he slowed his steps
and turned. So caught up in his thoughts was he that at first he appeared not to
recognise the dark-haired boy. Then Adric found himself being beckoned across the
quadrangle.

TheDoctor wasn't pleased to be disturbed; the cloister roomwas his special place
for deep, private thinking. 'Whenever you see me in here pacing up and down like
this, be a good chap and don't interrupt. Unless it's terribly urgent. It's not, is it?'

The boy shook his head. The Doctor shook his too; it was as if there was a loose
thought in there, rattling among the centuries of wisdom.

'Wel , now you know. In fact there's no need to come barging in here at all. If
it's terribly urgent you can always ring the cloister bell.'

Adric had never heard of the cloister bell. The Doctor explained that it was a
sort of communications device. 'Reserved for wild catastrophes and sudden calls to
man the battle stations.'

'Battle stations? The TARDIS doesn't have them, surely?'

'Not as such,' the Doctor replied vaguely. 'Still, I sometimes wonder whether I
shouldn't be running a tighter ship.'

He scratched at a nearby pillar. The stone was powdery, like chalk, and a rivulet
of dust cascaded from the point beneath the Doctor's finger. 'I'm afraid the Second
Law of Thermodynamics is taking its toll of the old thing.'

The Alzarians had given Adric a Badge for Mathematical Excellence, although
his grasp of physics wasn't very good - but on the journey from his home planet Adric
had had plenty of time to learn from the Doctor, and now he knew about the Earth
physicist Maxwell, and his ideas on entropy. Entropy was the waste energy that builds
up in systems, the rust on the wheels, the weeds in the vegetable garden, the heat
that eats away at components in the computer. Entropy seemed to be much on the
Doctor's mind lately.

Maxwell's Second Law of Thermodynamics consisted of two grim words:
'Entropy increases.'



The Doctor sighed. 'The more you put things together the more they keep falling
to bits.

That's the essence of the Second Law of Thermodynamics, and I never heard
a truer word spoken. Have you seen the state of the time column lately? Wheezing
like a grampus.'

'It will get us to Gallifrey, won't it?' Adric asked anxiously.

'Gallifrey?' The Doctor spoke the name of his own planet as if it were a new
word in his vocabulary. 'Oh yes . . . Are you really set on visiting Gallifrey?'

Adric nodded. 'That is where we're going, isn't it?'

The Doctor sat down slowly. Luckily there was a carved stone bench set in the
wall where they were standing, but there quite easily might not have been. 'That was
the very question I was pondering, Adric. In a general way. There's bound to be a lot
of fuss about Romana? Why she stayed behind in E-Space, official investigations, all
that sort of thing . . .’

'The Time Lords won't approve?'

'As a Gallifreyan she's broken the cardinal rule - she's become involved, and in a
pretty permanent sort of way. Perhaps we should let a few oceans go under the bridge
before heading back home.'

Adric smiled to conceal his disappointment. 'And see Gallifrey later?'

The Doctor nodded, but in no very positive way. 'Let me put another idea to
you . . . The place I have in mind isn't too far off our route. Well, sort of, give or
take a parsec or two.

It's my home from home.'

He turned to Adric with a grin. 'You'll like it. It's that place called Earth I was
telling you about.'

That same afternoon, outside a cottage house in a quiet village-like street many
hundreds of parsecs from where the Doctor and Adric were, but less than fifty miles
away from all that remained of the unfortunate Constable Seagrave, a care-worn
woman was sitting behind the steering wheel of a battered sports car that was almost
old enough to have been new when she was a girl. Despite the spring sunshine, she
was wel wrapped up against the possibility of cold. There was, as she was fond of
saying, no sense in taking chances with your health.

A young woman in the neat purple uniform of an air stewardess came haring
out of the house, her flight bag bumping at her side. 'Sorry to keep you waiting, Aunt
Vanessa.

Let's go.'



Aunt Vanessa hadn't been having much luck with the starter. Each time the
engine fired, then spluttered out.

Tegan was barely twenty years old, but she was used to taking charge. 'More
choke.

And easy on the throttle as you turn her over.'

Aunt Vanessa nodded her white fur hat towards the house. 'While I do that, dear,
I wonder if you'd mind shutting the front door.'

Tegan's Australian accent became even broader. 'Oh, rabbits! I promise I'll get
organised one day . . . '

Tegan closed the front door and ran back down the path again. 'Sorry, first flight
nerves, I guess.' In obedience to her niece’s imperious gesture, Aunt Vanessa
abandoned the intractable ignition switch and humped her bundled-up body across to
the passenger seat.

Immediately Tegan pulled the starter the old engine sprang to life. Clicking on
her safety belt reminded her of the training course she had just completed, and she
went into the routine. 'Good evening, passengers. To ensure continued safety on this
flight it is necessary to draw your attention to the oxygen apparatus situated above
each seating position . . .’

Wary of draughts, Aunt Vanessa hunched further into her fur collar as the car
pulled away from the curb.

Tegan changed smoothly up into third. 'This is brought into operation by gently
pulling the orange tag and placing the mouthpiece over the nose and mouth.
Disposable paper bags, together with our flight magazine, may be found in the recess
in the seat immediately in front of you . . . '

And she drove off down the street. Although she didn't know it then, Tegan's
route was destined to take her past the mysterious police box and onto a journey very
different from the passenger flight her training had prepared her for - a journey she
would never forget for the rest of the life.

Adric and the Doctor were walking quickly back through the maze of corridors
to the TARDIS console room. It still puzzled Adric how the Doctor managed to find
his way around the vast craft without a map.

'Earth's the planet with all the oceans, isn't it?' Adric asked as the Doctor paused
at a junction of three identical passages.

'That's the chap.'

'It sounds wet.'



The Doctor set off again with long shambling steps that made it hard for Adric
to keep up. 'Wet it is,' he said. 'At least, where we're going.'

The Doctor had explained once already about the blue boxes, but it hadn't made
much sense to Adric. A lot of what the Doctor said was like that. According to the
Doctor the blue boxes looked more or less like the TARDIS, but weren't. They had
no spacious accommodation, no viewer screens, and they didn't time-travel . . . Adric
didn't see why the Earth people bothered having them.

The corridor had petered out into a narrow passage. The Doctor stopped in front
of a door. 'They're a sort of elementary communications device. Telephone boxes,
from the Greek. 'Tele' meaning 'a long way', and 'phone' meaning 'sound', and 'box'
meaning . . .

' The Doctor opened the door. It was a small cupboard. 'Meaning we're lost . . .’

They weren't really, but the Doctor had to ask Adric not to ask any more
questionswhile he concentrated on finding theway. It was quite some time before they
were back in the console room, and the Doctor was able to resume a calm explanation
of his idea about going to Earth.

'I see,' said Adric. 'We're going to visit one of these boxes that are like the
TARDIS.' It sounded to him like another of the Doctor's typically batty schemes.

'You're getting your topsy mixed up with your turvy,' the Doctor corrected. 'The
TARDIS

is very like it! The blue box is what the mathematical model of the TARDIS
exterior is based on.'

The Doctor was at the console, busily setting the co-ordinates for Earth. Even
after several adventures with the Doctor there was so much Adric didn't understand
about the Time Lord and his technology - but he wanted to, very much.

'Block transfer computation,' the Doctor explained when he had finished at the
console.

A frown creased the smooth young face at his shoulder. 'I've never heard of that.'

Adric's precocious seriousness amused the Doctor. 'No reason why you should.
Logopolis is a quiet little place - keeps itself to itself.'

'Logopolis? But I thought we were going to Earth.'

'No, Logopolis is the other place. We take the measurements there afterward.'

Adric was by now thoroughly confused. 'We're going to measure Logopolis?'

'We measure the police box on Earth and then take the measurements to
Logopolis...'



said the Doctor patiently. Catching sight of the boy's blank expression he had the
tact to add: 'I'm afraid I'm not explaining this very well. It's all to do with the problem
of the chameleon circuit...'

Adric opened his mouth, on the point of voicing another question. But at that
moment the console room echoed to the sound of what might have been a big clock
bell, deep-toned and stately. It seemed to be coming from a very long way away, and
yet at the same time was somehow sinisterly present in the room.

The Doctor stopped dead, as if rooted to the spot. The expression on the Time
Lord's face sent a shiver up the boy's spine, and he froze too, and listened.

It was the first but not the last time Adric was to hear the cloister bell.

The traffic became heavier as they approached London, but Aunt Vanessa's little
car was going splendidly. Tegan enjoyed the rush of wind in her hair and the feel of
the engine under her control. She'd been a natural driver ever since the age of ten,
when her father had first lifted her onto the springy steel saddle of the tractor on their
sheep farm in Australia.

Driving was great. But flying - that was really travelling. Tegan took her eyes off
the road for a moment to glance up at the big blue canopy of the sky that seemed to go
up and up without limit above them. Cars were all right, they got youmoving, but they
did keep you stuck on the one level, reminding you that you were just a little human
being like everybody else with your feet in your shoes and your shoes on the ground.

'Tegan! Look out!' Aunt Vanessa's voice broke abruptly into her meditations.

The lorry was the size of a brontosaurus compared with Aunt Vanessa's little
mouse of a sports car, and it was cutting in, straight across them, closing in from the
middle lane.

Tegan slammed on the brakes and wrenched the wheel over. The lorry passed in
front of them with only inches to spare and travelled on towards London lumberingly
unaware of the terror it had caused. With a screech of rubber the sports car thumped
into the curb and came to a halt.

'Oh, rabbits!' Tegan exclaimed, jumping out. Through the windscreen she saw
Aunt Vanessa's face peeping out from its nest of white fur in dazed indignation. 'I'm
sorry, Aunt, honestly. I'm usually a pretty good driver.'

There wasn't any damage done to the body-work, but when Tegan saw the front
nearside tyre her heart sank. 'Aunt Vanessa, it's a blow out.'

The elderly bundle of fur extracted itself from the passenger seat to have a look.
'So it is. Dear me.' She was taking it quite sportingly, considering, Tegan thought.
'Well,' said Aunt Vanessa, 'what do we do now?'



Unknown to them that question was already decided. Perhaps Fate is always
lying in wait a few yards up the road; in this case for Tegan and her Aunt Vanessa
it was already in view. If they hadn't both been hypnotised by the immediate but
relatively trivial flat-tyre disaster that loomed so large in their minds, they could have
spotted it from where they stood.

It took the unusual shape of a blue police box. An abandoned bicycle was leaning
against it, the small door that housed the telephone was open, and from it dangled the
receiver on the end of its cord.

Adric listened. Apart from the wheezing of the time column as it heaved up
and down in the middle of the console, all was quiet. Adric found himself oddly
disappointed. 'The cloister bell's stopped.'

The Doctor nodded gravely.

'What does it mean, Doctor?'

'Nothing very much when it's not sounding.' The Doctor was trying to make a
joke of it, but Adric could see that the Time Lord regarded the cloister bell as far
from funny.

'But something must have made it ring?'

The Doctor bristled at the question. 'Not necessarily. It could well be our old
friend entropy crumbling away at the systems circuitry. We'd better check the main
logic junction.'

With a quick glance at the console to make sure the flight to Earth was on track,
the Doctor swept out of the console room. Adric followed.

'Is that something to do with the chameleon circuit you were telling me about?'
Adric asked.

The Doctor said that it wasn't, and went on to explain that while he didn't mind
being pestered with questions in the normal course of events - didn't mind at all, in fact
found the boy's ceaseless interrogation of anything and everything rather stimulating
- there were times (and this was one of them) when whys were unwise and silence
was golden

. . .

They travel ed down the corridors without saying another word, and the Doctor
wrapped his own dark thoughts around himself, with faint sighs and mumbles
escaping his lips from time to time.

Eventually they came to a large oval arch set into the wal of the corridor. It
framed a kind of panel made of a translucent material that Adric discovered to be
oddly heavy as he helped the Doctor lift it down. Behind the panel was what looked



like a mass of fine grey hair, except that if you looked closely you could see that each
hair had a tiny light that moved up and down its length. The effect was dazzling; the
thing seemed to be alive.

The Doctor poked the hair with his finger, and the lights flickered in response.

'Nothing wrong with the main logic junction, then.' He signalled to Adric to help
him put the panel back. 'Well, if the intermittent fault wasn't inside the TARDIS it
must be outside the TARDIS. Someone must be trying to get in touch with us. Long
way away, poor reception.'

They began walking back the way they had come. The Doctor turned to Adric,
as if seeking a second opinion. 'Don't you think?'

'Why ask me?' There was a sulky note in Adric's voice. 'I don't know anything
about it.

And I won't know anything if you don't tell me.'

The Doctor put his hand on the boy's shoulder. 'Sorry I snapped. I'm not quite
myself at the moment. What do you want to know?'

So as they made their way back to the console room the Doctor gave the boy
a brief outline of the chameleon circuit, simplifying the maths to a few concurrent
transcendental equations to convey the general picture. At least it explained how the
inside of the TARDIS came to be bigger than the outside.

The boy was quick to pick up the main point. 'So the inside space, where we are
now, is non-existential?'

'The dimensions are real enough, but they don't quite join up in the usual way.'

'They couldn't, could they. Not if the exterior of the TARDIS only exists as a
real space/time event and has to be mapped on to one of the interior continuums.'

The Doctor nodded. 'Precisely. Very good.'

'So you can turn it into anything you like?'

'Ah? a very sore point. Yes - according to the handbook - the outer plasmic shell
of the TARDIS is driven by the chameleon circuit.' But what the handbook said and
what the TARDIS actually did were two rather different things, as the Doctor had
long ago discovered.

'In theory,' said the Doctor, 'the TARDIS can change its appearance more or less
infinitely. In practice, however . . .’

The Doctor's voice tailed off. He had come to a halt in front of one of the doors.
'I always meant to get Romana to help me fix it one day'



The door was like all the others in the corridor. Rather oddly, almost as a ritual,
the Doctor pushed it open. As Adric glimpsed the familiar furnishings, the soft
curtains and the glass ornaments, he felt a pang for the absent occupant. She was at
the Gateway with Biroc and the Tharils, and he had reconciled himself to the fact that
there was no chance in the world of seeing her again. But he had completely forgotten
about her room. That was a shock; it was as if part of her were still here after all.

'I suppose we're going to miss her and K9,' said the Doctor in a voice that
suggested the thought had only just struck him. He looked down at Adric, and the
boy nodded, stuck for words.

The Doctor took a deep breath. 'But . . . the future lies . . .’

He looked up and down the corridor, pondering for a moment, as if not exactly
sure which way the future did lie. Then he drew the door of Romana's room firmly
shut and pointed to a branch of the corridor that ran off to the right.

'This way,' said the Doctor.

2
The time column was still oscillating uneasily when the Doctor and Adric got

back to the console room. Silence seemed no longer to be golden for the Doctor; he
was talking non-stop and Adric could hardly get a word in.

‘. . . which would all be perfectly fine, except that the chameleon circuit's stuck.
I first noticed it that time in the Totter's Yard, and that was many years ago. Come to
think of it, there was probably something up with it even before that. She was in for
repairs on Gallifrey at the very beginning of things . . . When I first . . . borrowed her.'

'Borrowed her?' Adric was able to interject. Rather worryingly, the Doctor had
vanished.

Yet the voice continued . . .



'On a sort of finder's keeper's basis. I should have waited until they fitted the new
version of the chameleon circuit. But there were pressing reasons for my departure at
the time.' His voice was coming from under the console unit. Adric walked round it
to find the Doctor on his hand and knees working at something on the undersufface.
'Ah, that's got it . . . ' said the Doctor.

Adric jumped back as a panel rose vertically up out of the console under his nose,
and then hinged forwards to form a horizontal table. The boy found himself looking
down at a keyboard with numbers and letters. A lean Gallifreyan digit prodded a
button on the console and the viewer screen opened. The full set of fingers danced
briefly across the keys of the startling new keyboard, and soon the screen showed a
shimmering blue outline picture Adric recognised.

'The TARDIS exterior!'

'Right. Now in theory, you should be able to do things like this . . . ' The keyboard
rattled as the Doctor entered in some more numbers and letters. While Adric watched,
the picture on the screen slowly transformed into a solid triangular shape.

'A tetrahedron,' said the boy knowingly.

'Roughly, yes. Egyptian idea. A pyramid.' The Doctor worked at the keyboard
again and an opening appeared in one of the sides of the object. Adric was doubtful.
'Yes, I suppose that's useful.'

'Useful? A door's essential. We've got to be able to get in and out.'

'No, I mean being able to change like that.'

'Quint essential,' said the Doctor. 'Remember the Master.'

It was the first time since they had left Traken that the Doctor had mentioned
his deadly enemy by name. He said it lightly, with no special emphasis. But even so
Adric shivered at this reminder of the evil renegade Time Lord who had plunged the
home planet of his friend Nyssa into darkness and confusion.

'If the chameleon circuit were working,' the Doctor mused, reaching for a lever
on the console, 'I'd only have to pul this . . . and we'd be a pyramid.'

The Doctor turned to Adric with a shrug. The picture on the screen had reverted
to the police box shape. 'Can't get away from it, you see.'

He seemed to need cheering up, so Adric said: 'But why do you want to? It's sort
of distinctive. A friendly sight, to look at.'

'And a sight too easy to look for. I'm not sure we should be distinctive.'

Suddenly Adric understood the Doctor's concern about the chameleon circuit.
The Master's own TARDIS had been in good repair, so he had been able to disguise it
as something the Trakens thought was a harmless old statue. But the Doctor's vehicle



was stuck in the shape of a blue police box – surely one of the most conspicuous
objects in the universe.

'It's not as if anybody's looking for us,' said Adric. 'You've disposed of theMaster
now. '

'Yes . . . I did, didn't I?' the Doctor replied, with a certain unease that left an
almost tangible silence hanging in the air for a moment or two. In his mind's eye Adric
could still see the terrifying blaze of colour around the Keeper's Chair as the Master
had met his fate.

The Doctor cleared his throat. 'It may just be nonsense . . . but since we left
Traken I've been feeling rather unsure about that . . . And then when the cloister bell
rang . . . '

The Doctor's eye fell on a small display screen set into the console, and in a blink
of the eye he had thrown off the mood that had gripped him. He grinned at Adric.
'Ah, Earth,'

exclaimed the Doctor, as if those dark thoughts were now a million miles away.
'Nearly there!'

Aunt Vanessa looked down at the grass verge under her feet and worried about
the rheumatic diseases that struck upwards from damp ground, even through sensible
shoes and two pairs of stockings. Cars and lorries were whizzing along the by-pass
not ten feet from where they stood, but none of them showed any signs of stopping
to help.

'I really think we should telephone for help, dear.'

Tegan shook her head. 'Feeble. We'll crack this ourselves, or not at all.' Her
rummage in the boot had brought to light a greasy metal tube with a rod running
through it at right-angles. 'Wheel spanner. Just the job.'

Getting the hubcap off was easy. She jiggled the wheel spanner onto one of the
nuts and stood on the lever. Eventually the nut came free, but as it turned it seemed to
release a mysterious whirring, chuffing sound, which Tegan vaguely associated with
the remaining air escaping from the tyre. Aunt Vanessa heard it too, coming from
behind her. She looked round, but there was nothing there - only a couple of blue
police boxes.

'By the way, dear,' said Aunt Vanessa, not wanting to interfere, but it did look
dangerous, 'don't you think we should put a jack under there before you take the wheel
off? They always do it that way in the films.'

Tegan straightened up. The dear old cinema-goer was perfectly right, of course.
Tegan strode round to the boot again.

Rabbits, rabbits, rabbits!



The time column had stopped oscillating, and Adric knew this meant the
TARDIS had come to the end of its journey. At a nod from the Doctor he worked the
lever that opened the viewer screen.

The shutters parted to reveal a broad expanse of some flat grey surface on which
coloured objects streamed in both directions. Adric guessed it had been carved out
of the countryside, because you could see the greenness and trees on either side. The
coloured objects had wheels, and as you looked closer you could see they were
primitive vehicles, with people inside.

Close to them was a blue box, exactly like the TARDIS.

'We've missed,' said the Doctor.

'What's supposed to happen?' asked Adric.

'I usually suppose we're going to miss.' The Doctor threw a disapproving glance
at the console, and seemed to be addressing it directly. 'I just thought it might make
a pleasant change to materialise on the right co-ordinates.' He checked some of the
console settings, and made a quick calculation in his head. 'Two point six metres off
target.

What a landing!'

'That's not bad,' Adric pointed out, in fairness to the old TARDIS.

'That's what I said - what a landing!'

Adric instinctively reached for the lever that worked the exit door, but the Doctor
stopped him.

'Aren't we going out there to measure it?'

TheDoctor shook his head. 'No need to draw attention to ourselves. The TARDIS
and I are getting rather better at these short hops.'

And the Doctor leaned over the console, gingerly resetting the co-ordinates.

Aunt Vanessa and her niece had been too busy to notice the arrival of a second
police box on the verge of the Barnet by-pass, so they certainly didn't notice its
dematerialisation. Passers-by in their cars who were not too caught up in their own
small immediate destinies might have seen - though nobody did - one of the big blue
roadside objects shimmer into translucency and depart. By not seeing it, nobody was
misled - for in fact the TARDIS did not depart.

To be precise, what happened was this. At one moment there were two police
boxes side by side. They seemed identical, though a close observer might have noticed
that from one the telephone receiver dangled loosely on its cord, and the light on top
of the other had begun to flash.



And at the next moment there was only one police box. It was the one with the
dangling cord, but the cord was no longer dangling. An Earth person watching from
the verge would have found this very puzzling. But like a lot of problems the solution
was simple from the inside.

Adric was on the inside. 'You've materialised around it!' the boy exclaimed.

The blue shape was swimming into focus inside the TARDIS console room: a
police box with a dangling telephone.

'With considerable finesse, as I hope you noticed.' The Doctor stepped forward
to inspect it, something close to a smirk of satisfaction on his face.

But the boy was worried. 'Are you sure it isn't another TARDIS, Doctor?'

'I hope not. That would produce some very unpleasant dimensional anomalies.
No, it's just an ordinary police box.'

There was an official-looking notice on a small panel set into the door: Police
Telephone Free for Use of Public. Advice and Assistance Obtainable Immediately.
Officers and Cars Respond to Urgent Calls. Pull to Open. Adric had seen identical
wording on the outside of the TARDIS, and had taken it to be some sort of joke of
the Doctor's. Officers and Cars had never, to his knowledge, responded to Urgent Cal
s, although there were several occasions when he and the Doctor could have used a
little extra help.

He reached for the thing dangling on the end of a cord in order to tidy it away in
the little box in the front door, but the Doctor quickly took it from him. 'Best not to
touch,' the Doctor said. 'Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle, and so forth.'

'What's that?' the boy asked.

'I'm not entirely certain. Something to dowith not being able tomeasure an object
without disturbing it.'

The Doctor looked at the phone in his hand, and then waved it at Adric.

'Disturbed it already, you see.' He paused to debate with himself for a moment
whether to leave the phone as it was or hang up. Then he hung up the phone and
delicately shut the little door.

The Doctor seemed to know an awful lot of people with Rules and Theories and
Principles. Adric opened his mouth to ask more about Mr Heisenberg, but the Time
Lord shushed him with the gesture of a finger to his lips, and took a folding steel ruler
from his pocket. 'Get something to write with and take these dimensions down,' said
the Doctor. 'I've been meaning to do this for centuries.'



The handle of the jack was so stiff that Aunt Vanessa had to help Tegan with
it, which Tegan privately viewed as one small triumph in an afternoon of defeat.
Together they managed to get the car propped up, then Tegan showed Aunt Vanessa
how to work the wheel spanner, and went round to the boot again. She glanced at her
watch as she hauled the spare tyre out. It was a good job they'd left Aunt Vanessa's
house in plenty of time. There was no panic yet - as long as nothing else went wrong.

'I'm so sorry,' said Aunt Vanessa, taking a very early rest from her efforts. 'What
a thing to happen on your first day.'

The wheel was caught up in the tangle of a string shopping bag and a dog lead
and an old cardigan with holes in the elbows. 'Car's are OK,' said Tegan, 'but I guess
I'm just spoiled with having our own plane back home.'

It was a Cessna, and Tegan's father had taught her to fly, though he said she was
still a little too impetuous to go solo.

The moment Tegan dropped the tyre onto the verge she knew something was
wrong. It wasn't heavy enough, and it didn't bounce with the sort of ringing sound you
expect from a properly inflated tyre. She looked up accusingly at Aunt Vanessa. 'What
kind of a maintenance schedule are you running here, Aunt V! This tyre's completely
flat too!'

Aunt Vanessa smiled a faint disarming smile that had always stood her in good
stead when people from strange religious sects turned up on the doorstep. Tegan knew
the smile of old, and refused to be warmed.

She turned away and looked about her, as if seeking help from elsewhere. On the
far side of the road, beyond the rushing traffic of all those people in cars who quite
infuriatingly were getting where they wanted to go with no trouble at all, Tegan saw,
standing on a mound of grass, a figure dressed in white, gazing in her direction. No,
it wasn't white, it was a kind of gauzy, pale, vague, fading . . .

Tegan blinked her eyes and looked again. There was nothing there. Or so she
thought at the time.

'There can't be much more of this,' said Adric, trying not to sound rude. His
notebook was filling up with figures and the Doctor seemed to have been calling out
measurements for ages.

The Doctor was on his knees, and didn't look up. 'Measuring a police box means
measuring it in every possible dimension.'

Adric counted the entries in his note book. 'It can't have . . . thirty-seven
dimensions.

You said it was an ordinary Earth object.' 'Every dimension and in every detail.
The Logopolitans convert this into a precise mathematical model.'



'Of the police box? Why?'

'You're very fond of short words that begin with W and end in question marks,'
said the Doctor, levering himself up to give Adric another measurement. 'I like to see
that in the young. But by way of variation you might try longer questions like "What
else can I do to help?"'

'All right. What else can I do to help?'

The Doctor pointed to the top of the police box. 'You can climb up there for me.
Here, I'll give you a hand.'

The top of the police box gave Adric a view of the console room he hadn't seen
before, and it was odd to have the viewer screen below eye level. He noticed there
were two Earth people working at a vehicle that had pulled up awkwardly onto the
grass verge.

Adric stared at the younger of the two women, feeling a strange tingle in his
spine. It wasn't because her face looked rather beautiful, framed by that dark red hair
under the severe purple cap that matched her uniform. Adric had the sudden
completely ridiculous feeling that she was somebody he knew very well, though of
course that was impossible, because he had never been to this planet before. Or
perhaps it was the even more ridiculous feeling that he was going to know her!

'Are you all right?' the Doctor asked, getting his attention by prodding him with
the end of the folding ruler.

Adric dismissed the thought from his head, but as the measuring continued he
couldn't help casting occasional glances at the viewer screen.

When at last the measurements were done they went over to the console to enter
them into the memory management system. The Doctor seemed very pleased with the
day's work, although Adric still wasn't sure why they had to go to Logopolis.

'Didn't I explain that?' The Doctor seemed surprised. 'To overlay these
dimensions on the TARDIS. The dimensional interference patterns will shake the
thing loose.'

Adric nodded slowly. 'And that's block transfer computation?'

'Part of it. It's a way of modelling space/time events through pure calculation.
It's not easy to explain in a word...'

It took a lot of words. Adric gathered that over the centuries the Logopolitans
had developed a completely new kind of mathematics that analysed the structure of
the physical world - or rather the very nature of structure itself. But as the Doctor
continued his explanation, with many diversions into astronomical history, wave
theory, and even, at one point, the life cycle of the procyon lotor, it gradually dawned
on the young Alzarian that the Doctor wasn't very sure of his ground theoretically.



Block transfer computation! To Adric the idea of a mathematics that could,
among other things, bring physical objects into being through pure calculation was
immensely exciting. It was infuriating that amanwho knew somuch about completely
useless things should be so woolly about such an important subject.

The Doctor had begun his explanation while he was in the middle of resetting
the co-ordinates. But in the course of talking to Adric and waving his arms about to
illustrate points in his argument he had lost his place, and now he had to go back and
start all over again. He would have finished the job with no trouble this time, if Adric
hadn't asked, with a measure of deliberate irony, 'If it's all as easy as that, I don't see
why we need to go to Logopolis at all. We can do it ourselves, here.'

This brought the Doctor to a thoughtful halt. 'It's not that simple, of course . . .
I went into it all when they first offered to do the chameleon conversion for me . . .
it's highly specialised...'

'A bit beyond our intellectual capability?' the boy asked innocently.

'Wel , I wouldn't say that. It's not just amatter of understanding distributed cluster
algebra. The actual working out's very tedious, lots of fiddly computations. Much
better to leave it to the Logopolitans. They can do it standing on their heads.'

Adric was genuinely surprised. 'Not with a computer?'

Doctor had encountered these idiomatic difficulties with Adric before. When
you've been brought up in a different universe there are bound to be small cultural
barriers, even with the best will in the world.

'Standing on their heads . . . it's an expression.' The Doctor explained what it
meant, and then went on: 'But now you come to mention it, they don't use computers.
It's all done by word of mouth.'

'Is that another expression?'

The Doctor shook his head and muttered something. He was concentrating on
the console, determined to get it right this time.

'They speak it?' Adric exclaimed.

The Doctor shrugged. 'Mutter. Intone.'

'Intone the computations? Why?'

'I wondered that too.' A mouthful of large white teeth beamed down disarmingly.
'Never quite had the nerve to ask them.' Then as he turned back to pull the
dematerialisation lever the Doctor's eye was caught by one of the small indicator
panels that were dotted about the console.



There were somany knobs, levers, read-out displays and switches that Adric had,
quite early on in his relationship with the Doctor, abandoned all hope of mastering
the technology of flying the TARDIS, although he had managed to do it once, quite
by accident. But the doctor knew exactly what he was doing, and silly, woolly or just
plain baffling as he could be at other times, when working at the console he took life
very seriously.

So Adric knew straight away from the Doctor's expression that something was
wrong.

The Doctor tapped the indicator panel. 'You've got a lively enquiring mind,
Adric. Explain this.'

The panel was labelled Weak Force Flux Field Indicator, and the needle was
jammed over to the right-hand side in an area marked in red as Beyond Limits.

'It couldn't be an instrumentation fault, could it?' Adric suggested. The boy felt
obliged to say something intelligent.

'Very easily, knowing the state of the TARDI S.' The Doctor hit the panel again,
this time with a certain amount of vindictiveness. On looking again he pumped his
cheeks, making the breath whistle between his teeth. 'No, I don't think so. What we've
got here is a gravity bubble. And fairly local, too.'

'Is that dangerous?'

'We'd better not dematerialise till we've investigated.' He threw Adric a less
convincing replica of the reassuring grin. 'I'm probably overlooking the obvious again.
Back in two shakes.'

The Doctor jerked back a lever on the console and strode across to the double
doors that swung open in response. Viewer screens and time technology were all very
well, but nothing was better than seeing for yourself.

The blue external doors opened a fraction. The Doctor peeped out and looked
round.

It was good to be back on Earth again. It was just the right size from the point
of view of gravitational pull, and the atmosphere was rich in oxygen, which tended
to give the foliage a green colour that was relaxing on the eyes. He stepped out and
took a deep breath, forgetting for a moment that the TARDIS was parked beside the
noise and the fumes of the passing traffic.

Sunspot activity - he squinted up at the sky - seemed to be about normal for the
time of century, but in any case the Doctor discounted natural causes: the field was too
localised. There was no obvious high technology in the vicinity as far as he could see,
and the landscape around him showed none of the secondary effects he would have
expected, given the strength of the field. There would surely at least be a high wind.



He remembered the turmoil of darkness that had blown across Traken at the
time of the Keeper's passing, and how the Master had sought to step into his place.
That last battle had certainly drained the Doctor's strength, but at least Traken had
been restored to the harmony that had made it famous. Tremas the Councillor and his
daughter Nyssa were happy again.

What if the Master had somehow escaped from Traken?

The Doctor pushed the thought out of his mind, and was about to duck back into
the TARDIS again when his eye fastened on something on the far side of the road.

A pale figure was watching, its outline humanoid in so far as it was definable.
The Doctor stared, and the figure seemed to stare back. The Doctor reached out for
support, and leaned against the TARDIS door, almost white-faced, his two hearts
beating a little faster.

Something quite extraordinary was happening. He had sensed it, and now - here
it was!






3

Inside the TARDIS the gravity bubble, or whatever it was, had produced a pearly
cloud over the viewer screen. Adric wasn't particularly disappointed to have lost sight
of the young woman who had given him such strange feelings, because the feelings
had gone now, and he knew that the temporary giddiness must have been due to being
so high up in the console room.

In any case, there was something much more interesting to think about. In the
Doctor's temporary absence, Adric's curiosity had drawn him towards the police box.

The small hatch with the telephone in it wasn't the way in; it was only a sort of
cupboard set in the main doors. And they were locked, just like the TARDIS. Adric
took a metal coathanger from the hatstand and straightened out the hook so that he
could work it into the lock to turn the tumblers.

'Don't touch that!'

Adric jumped at the sound of the Doctor's voice. 'Sorry, Doctor. I just thought it
might have something to do with the gravity bubble.'

The Doctor was grim-faced. 'I'm afraid you might be right. And that's a very
good reason to leave it alone.'

Adric stepped back from the police box. Then a small, extraordinary thing
happened.

One of the blue doors creaked slightly. As they watched it swung open as if of
its own accord.

The Doctor approached the police box cautiously, reached out for the second
door handle, and began to turn it as if it were made of icing sugar and might break
off at any moment.

It was obvious straight away from the size of the interior that this was no ordinary
police box. With tremendous care the Doctor stepped through the double doors.

Perhaps it was the yellowish tinge to the light that made the room the Doctor
entered so inhospitable: somehow sterile and dangerous territory. The air was cold,
too, and as the Doctor looked about him the vapour from his breath hung in the
atmosphere like puffs of smoke. Apart from this the Doctor felt at home, because it
was home - or something very like it.

'The TARDIS console room!'

The Doctor heard the boy's exclamation without turning round. 'Get back to the
TARDIS,' he hissed.

'But this is the TARDIS, Doctor!'



'A TARDIS, perhaps.'

'It looks just like yours . . .’

'Don't argue with me! Back to the console room and stay there.'

The Doctor spoke with such force that Adric hastily bundled back into his head
al the questions that were urging to be asked. He was about to move to the door when
the Doctor reached out and grabbed him quite savagely by the shoulder.

'Wait! Don't move. You may be safer with me.' The Doctor wasn't looking at
Adric; his eyes were narrowed, fixed on some point on the other side of the console
where the yellow light seemed particularly thick.

The boy fol owed his gaze. The object was familiar enough, but for some reason
the sight of it almost stopped his heart. Standing by the console of the room that was
identical in every detail to the Doctor's console room, was a police box. Its small
telephone door was open, and from it the receiver dangled on the cord.

'It's hopeless, Aunt Vanessa! Just hopeless!'

Tegan disconnected the foot-pump and threw it back into the boot. No amount
of legwork would blow up a tyre with a hole in it. 'Honestly, Aunt Vanessa, how long
have you been driving around with a dud spare tyre?' She looked at her watch, and
the remains of her confident self-sufficiency evaporated into thin air.

Aunt Vanessa remained cool. 'Don't worry, there's still plenty of time to get the
garage.'

She was peering across to the other side of the road; the point where it flattened
away into the distance was marked by little fluttering flags enshrining what looked
like a set of petrol pumps.

Tegan stood the wheel on end. Her hands were smudged with grease and mud,
but so far she had avoided getting any dirt on her uniform. She thought of the clean,
air-conditioned interior of her 747; there was still time to catch the flight, if she made
some quick, level-headed decisions. 'OK, Aunt Vanessa, I admit defeat. I won't be
a jiff.'

'Mind how you cross the road,' Aunt Vanessa cal ed out after her, as Tegan set
out for the garage, awkwardly rolling the tyre in front of her.

That's a point, thought Tegan. How do I cross the road with this thing? But she
had only gone a few yards when she came across the obvious solution to all their
troubles. She read the notice. Police Telephone Free for Use of Public. Advice and
Assistance Obtainable Immediately. Officers and Cars Respond to Urgent Calls.



For some reason it said Pull to Open, which must have been a mistake. Because
when she pushed against them the double doors opened inward. 'That's funny,' said
Tegan to herself, peering into the interior. 'That's very peculiar indeed . . . '

And leaning the tyre against the outer wall, where she noticed somebody had
been foolish enough to park an unlocked bicycle . . . Tegan stepped inside.

The Doctor hung up the receiver and gently closed the small door. Adric
shivered, and not just because of the cold. 'But if this is another TARDIS...!'

'It may be, it may not be,' the Doctor interrupted. 'Too early to tell.

Other things can produce this sort of dimensional anomaly.' Cautiously the
Doctor pushed against the doors, but they seemed locked tight.

Adric remembered that he was still holding the coathanger. At first the Doctor
refused to let the boy approach the door himself and took the coathanger from him.
But whatever else the Doctor was good at he certainly wasn't a natural lock-picker,
and eventually he had to stand aside for his young companion. 'But please be very
careful,' he warned.

As Adric delicately explored the lock with the end of the wire the Doctor stayed
close beside him.

If Tegan had arrived in the real TARDIS console room a fraction earlier she
would have seen the light on the roof of the police box spring into life, dancing blue
reflections across the circular indentations that decorated the TARDIS walls. At the
same moment the police box itself began to drain of colour and form; whirring and
chuffing . . . it dematerialised like an idea forgotten.

As it was, she entered through the double doors a split second too late, but the
sight still made her catch her breath. 'It's some kind of . . . flying saucer!'

She moved slowly towards the glitter of instrumentation in the middle of the
room, frightened and yet drawn to the technology. It reminded her of the cockpit of the
Cessna, as if the instrument panel of that small plane had been magically multiplied
in the reflections of a kaleidoscope.

She cast her eye around the walls, and noticed an old-fashioned hatstand - the
last piece of furniture you would expect to see - complete with a few hats and a very
long scarf that trailed down to the floor.

At that moment the double doors of the TARDIS swung together and closed with
a thud that resonated round the room. She ran to them, scrabbling at the unyielding
surface for handles, anything to get them open. She was trapped!



The yellow light thickened for each set of doors they went through, and each
time the air was colder. The rooms were all the same in every other respect - it was
what the Doctor cal ed a 'simulacrum'. They always found the police box in the same
place, a few feet to the right of the console as they entered through the doors. And
each time the phone was dangling from its cord.

Adric had suggested going back, but the Doctor had known it would be
impossible.

Adric didn't understand at first, and insisted on trying to leave the way they had
come in.

But the entrance was a heavy yellow nothingness when you approached it from
the other direction; matter seemed just to cease.

The Doctor's face was grim as he watched his young companion bring the
coathanger to bear once again on the police box door. To Adric it always seemed to
be the same lock. How many locks and doors? He had opened so many now that he
had completely lost count.

'It couldn't be an infinite regression, could it?' Adric asked through chattering
teeth. The room they were entering was lit by even darker amber light than the last.

TheDoctor approached the police box and, as he had done so often before, picked
up the receiver and hung up, closing the small door. 'There's a chance it may stop
suddenly. Behind one of these doors there may be something completely different.

Then we'll know it's over.'

'And if we don't find something completely different?'

The Doctor shrugged, but gave no other answer.

'We'll be stuck here forever, won't we, Doctor? You can't get out of an infinite
regression.' There was a note of panic in the boy's voice. 'That's true, isn't it?'

'True, but boring,' said the Doctor. And with a wink to dispel any hint of tedium,
he gestured to Adric to open the next police-box door.

Tegan explored her prison. She was torn between immense curiosity about what
was clearly some sort of flying machine, and a fear of the strange craft that was so
unlike anything she had ever seen.

She surveyed the array of switches, buttons and levers on the console. There
must be intelligent life at the end of this lot, surely? One of the buttons looked rather
like an intercom switch. She pressed it and spoke into the small grill beside it. 'Hello,
anybody receiving me?'

There was no answer. Collecting her courage, she tried some more buttons on
the console. 'Hello? Come in, anybody . . . My name is Tegan Jovanka, and I'd like
to talk to the pilot.'



She stopped and listened. There was something. The sound came from behind a
door she hadn't noticed before. She crossed over to it and pushed it open. Through it
she glimpsed a corridor that appeared to lead deeper into the craft.

She paused at the door and listened again. The deep note came in pulses, resonant
like a bell. It sounded distant, but at the same time seemed to be very much an urgent
presence in the room. 'Hello?' Tegan cal ed into the corridor. 'Is that the crew through
there?'

There was no reply but the continued mournful chime. Tegan took a deep breath
andwalked through to explore the corridor. The punctured wheel, the airport andAunt
Vanessa were three minor problems that had slipped her mind completely.

But Tegan was very much on Aunt Vanessa's mind. The elderly lady had been
sitting wrapped up in the car for what seemed an age of waiting, and at last, being
careful where she put her feet on the muddy verge, she had decided for the sake of
her circulation to stretch her legs in the direction of the garage.

The abandoned tyre leaning against the police box aroused her suspicions
immediately.

Something had happened to Tegan, and what was needed was a telephone.

And there it was! Aunt Vanessa was so delighted to find Fate giving Luck a small
push in her direction during the course of the afternoon's rigmarole that she forgot
to be careful where she trod. She was within reach of the police box when her feet
skidded from under her, toppling her against the double doors.

They opened under the impact. When she scrambled painfully to her feet again
she was standing on solid ground, astonished to find herself inside a large . . .
laboratory, was it?

She heard a light chuckle and turned round, still a little dazed from her fall.
'Tegan . . .?

What on earth have you . . .! Goodness me . . .’

The sight was so terrifying that before the threat had fully formed in her mind she
was stumbling back towards the double doors. She struggled with them; they seemed
to be closing on her, trapping her in with that . . . evil!

And then her feet were skidding in mud again. She backed away from the
monstrous presence that lurched towards her across the grass in slow-motion pursuit.
Still it stayed with her, this chuckling thing for which she couldn't form a name,
piercing her with a gaze that froze the thoughts in her brain.

Somehow Aunt Vanessa found herself beside the tyre. She reached for it, hoping
to use it for a shield, and despite its surprising weight managed to lift it from the
ground. The chuckle that came from the pursuing figure was frankly derisive.



The traffic on the road passed by unheeding. No one heard the throttled cry, the
chuckle of triumph, or smelled the ozone left in the air by the sizzling discharge of
the electronic device.

Even the spare tyre that rolled out from the verge and wound its way between
the stream of passing cars remained unnoticed for several minutes.

The yellow light was so dense around them now that Adric could only make out
the Doctor as a lumbering shape beside him. The boy's fingers were blue with cold
and the locks were becoming harder to manage. With each door his heart sank deeper,
and he could tell from the Doctor's voice that even a Time Lord's sense of proportion
is not proof against all disasters.

'Careful!' the Doctor whispered when the wire coathanger missed the lock and
scraped across the face of the door that the dingy light had transformed from blue to
a deep oily green. 'We're getting closer into the nucleus of the bubble . . . if it has
a nucleus.'

'It is a gravity bubble, then?'

'With this many images there's only one thing it could be.'

'What can be causing it, Doctor?'

The Doctor hesitated, as if reluctant to share his thoughts with the boy. 'When
we materialised round the police box - someone had been here before us.'

Someone? The lock was stiff, and as the Doctor's low whisper continued in his
ear Adric had to concentrate to keep his mind on the position of the tumblers he could
feel at the end of the wire. He understood what the Doctor was trying to say, but it
was hardly thinkable. Another TARDIS, materialising round the police box before
they arrived?

Someone must have anticipated what he and the Doctor had planned to do!

The lock clicked open. Adric turned his head towards the Doctor and his voice
came huskily. 'But who?'

The Doctor put his finger to his lips, andmoving Adric gently to one side reached
out to push open the door.

The light of the sky rushed into their eyes. They were both astonished to find
themselves in the open air, standing beside a police box on the by-pass.

The police inspector had spotted the illegally parked sports car and instructed
the constable to pull over. While the police inspector crossed the verge to investigate,
the constable identified a hazard to traffic in the fast lane and nipped out between the
passing cars with a due regard to safety to roll the tyre out of harm's way.



The constable was gratified to see the inspector running towards him with a view
to giving him a hand dragging the tyre onto the verge. Or so he thought, until the
inspector reached him.

What the inspector had to report was brief, breathless and, as far as the constable
was concerned, utterly incomprehensible. The inspector was on the point of steering
the constable over to the car to corroborate the story with the evidence of his own
eyes, when they spotted the suspect.

The constable knew at once from the gentlemen's attire that they'd got an odd
one here.

Your average member of the public does not wander abroad in a long red coat
and even longer scarf.

Despite the shock, from which he had clearly not properly recovered, the
inspector was able to muster a professional tone as he addressed the tousel-haired
newcomer. 'Good morning, sir. Would that be your vehicle over there?'

The Doctor must have sensed unwanted complications. He signalled to Adric
behind his back to stay under cover of the police box. 'Not mine, inspector,' said the
Doctor, tactfully identifying the man's rank from the silver pips on his shoulder. 'No,
I haven't driven for ages. Not a car, that is.'

The inspectormaintained a respectful tone, though his suspicionswere hardening
fast.

'I wonder how you come to be here, then. There's not much else here but the road.'

'I . . . well, I admit that might be a little difficult to explain.'

The Doctor found himself being steered by the elbow in the direction of the
abandoned sports car. 'And while you're working that one out, sir, perhaps you could
also have a go at explaining this.'

The Doctor stared into the back seat, his face frozen into an expression of horror.
What he saw confirmed his worse fears: somehow theMaster must have escaped from
Traken. When he spoke again the Doctor's voice was urgent.

'He's still around here somewhere!'

'He, sir?' The inspector glanced at the constable with a silent warning to be ready
in case of trouble.

'The Master, of course,' said the Doctor, pointing to the gruesome evidence in
the back seat of the car.

In the dreadful transformation every detail had been perfectly preserved. There
was no mistaking the smart blue uniform of Constable Seagrave, who had last been
heard of putting in a cal down a bad line from the nearby police box.



The other body was unknown to any of those present. But if Tegan had been
there she would have been able to tell them that the inert shape, shrunken like the
constable down to the size of a doll, was all that remained of her Aunt Vanessa.



4

The Doctor was trying to explain something to the two official-looking men in
blue uniforms. From behind the police box, Adric caught a few words: 'Now just a
minute, Officer. You don't realise what's going on here . . .'

The inspector's face was a grey wall of officialdom. 'No, sir, but I'll take the
details when we get back to the station. Lucky for you, it's not up to me to judge.'

'Lucky? Oh, now surely you don't think . . .' The Doctor tailed off. He knew from
past experience that jumping to conclusions was a favourite exercise on Earth. And
people in uniforms were much the same all over the universe.

The inspector glanced across at the constable. 'We're not paid to have opinions,
sir.

Just to do our duty.'

'Wel , I have opinions,' the Doctor retorted, gesturing towards the ghastly
evidence in the back seat: 'This is the calling card of one of the most evil creatures in
this universe, and I don't intend to stand here and debate the issue with you.'

This last remark was as much for Adric's benefit as anything else. 'I'm afraid,
gentlemen,' the Doctor went on, 'that I'm going to have to get after him.' So far the
Doctor had been careful to avoid looking in the boy's direction. But now he threw the
briefest glance towards the TARDIS, and momentarily caught Adric's eye. 'So, if you
can help me create a diversion . . .'

The inspector's eyebrows went up a notch further. 'Yes, I see, sir. You'd better
come straight along with us.'

'Of course, I'd love to. But . . .'

With tact, but firmly, the constable took the Doctor's arm. 'To assist us with our
enquiries.'

Adric pressed back against the TARDIS, thinking furiously. Here was a chance
to repay the Doctor for . . . wel , for just being the Doctor. He remembered their first
meeting on Alzarius, when the Time Lord and Romana had taken him in and tended
his wounds, and how subsequently the Doctor hadn't minded all that much to discover
the boy stowing away on the TARDIS.

The two policemen began to steer their shambling suspect towards their car, and
Adric had to back round a corner of the police box to stay out of sight. He didn't know
that the thing he had stumbled over was called a bicycle, but it was portable, bulky
and would provide a step up to the top of the TARDIS. It gave him an idea.

The two policemen had a firm grip on the Doctor by the time they got to the
car. When the constable stopped to open the door the Doctor allowed himself to be



surprised by the sight of the police box, and said, as if the thought had just struck him,
'Would you mind awfully if I just phoned my solicitor?'

'That's not for this sort of thing, sir. It's a police call box.'

'That's what I like about this country!' The Doctor exclaimed, mustering up an
authoritative enthusiasm that heightened the two officers' bafflement.

'A place for everything and everything in its place!'

Whatever the Doctor was planning to do next, he was obviously not about to get
into the car willingly. The inspector had a way of dealing with difficult cases. 'If you're
asking for a formal arrest, sir . . .' The inspector had already made up his mind that the
tall tousle-headed man in the absurd red coat was dangerous, a lunatic perhaps. The
big toothy grin he got from the Doctor in response to the official warning was further
confirmation of this suspicion. In consequence the inspector was ready for anything -
except the thing that actually happened. No reasonable person could have anticipated
that a bicycle would come arching through the air above them, to land with a clatter
on the police car roof. The Doctor was not a reasonable person in that sense, and in
any case he had the advantage of glimpsing Adric the moment before, perched up on
top of the police box with the bicycle held high over his head.

When the two startled officers turned to their vehicle, the Doctor detached
himself quickly from their company and sprinted towards the police box.

'Quick! Get him, Davis!' The inspector's shouted command came too late. By
then Adric had jumped down from the roof, almost tumbling onto the Doctor, and the
pair of them had bundled in through the blue double doors.

Constable Davis and the inspector squelched across the grass to the police box,
to arrive there just as the lock snicked shut. The constable put his shoulder to the
doors, and when they refused to budge he shouted and hammered on the panel with
his fist, which gave the inspector a chance to demonstrate the superior intelligence
that had earned him his rank.

'No problem, Davis. He's in there, and we're out here. He can't stay cooped up
forever.'

'What do we do, sir? Sit it out?'

'Can't waste the taxpayer's time, Davis. There's a key in the car. Get it.'

Intelligence misleads. The inspector reasonably mistook the police box for a
police box, but if he had known as much as the Doctor about the thing he was planning
to unlock he would hardly have been so confident. Knowledge of that kind, however,
would have involved certificates in time flowmechanics, not easily come by on Earth.

The Doctor's own certificates were hanging on a wall in one of the TARDIS's
rooms, although he couldn't remember which. That was the trouble with infinitely
reconfigurable living quarters - to avoid confusion you tend to keep to a few favourite



well-lived-in areas and leave the rest to the dust and silence. Certificates, in the
Doctor's view, were historical evidence of having been taught something - not
guarantees of present knowledge. They belonged in long-abandoned rooms.

Even if they had been impressively decorating the console room walls, no
amount of certificates would have told the Doctor why the TARDIS seemed at that
critical moment to have forgotten all it knew about time flow mechanics, and was
behaving as if it were nothing more than the inspector's plain and simple police box.

It might have been the cloister bell. Adric had drawn the Doctor's attention to
the sinister chime the moment they got through the doors.

'It's ringing again, Doctor. Shouldn't we do something about it.'

The Doctor was busy at the console. 'A choice of emergencies. In a moment.
Better dematerialise first.'

The police box - or whatever it was they had materialised around – was gone,
and the Doctor very much hoped it had taken the gravity bubble with it. The console
seemed to think otherwise. Adric knew little about the workings of the mechanism,
but it wasn't hard to detect the laboured noise emanating from the time column, which
flashed in a half-hearted way and resolutely failed to move.

'It should be oscillating by now, Doctor.'

TheDoctor glanced down at theweak force indicator. The needle was lower now,
but still well inside the red zone. 'The gravity bubble's still very close. It's dragging
us back.'

'What about the cloister bell?'

'Shut the door.'

Adric did so, but was uneasy about it. 'We can't just ignore it.'

'Nonsense! Of course we can,' snapped the Doctor. Adric didn't know that the
First Law of Crisis is to panic about one thing at a time. The Doctor was too busy
with the console, checking the displays and making quick calculations in his head,
to give lessons in the fundamentals. 'There must be something we can simplify here,'
Adric heard him mutter to himself. Suddenly his bony index finger, which had been
scanning the rows of dials and switches, descended on a small panel, stabbing at it
accusingly.

'Architectural configuration . . . that's the one!'

Adric leaned closer to see what he was doing. The panel was labelled Interior
Space Allocation, and at the touch of a few buttons was displaying what looked like
a series of graphs with whole areas beneath the curves filled in with colour.



Anticipating the question on Adric's lips, the Doctor said, 'We'll have to find
some more power from somewhere. All this space,' he waved a loose hand at the
panel, 'takes up energy. I'm going to jettison Romana's room.'

'Are you sure?' asked Adric, very upset by the idea.

Uncharacteristically the Doctor's temper flared up. 'Why do you expect me to
be sure?

This is life! Nothing is sure!' The boy couldn't remember ever seeing him so
angry.

The Doctor returned to the panel, and for a moment his finger wavered over the
red button marked Execute. Adric held his breath. He knew the ominous tri-syllable
only referred to the routine to jettison Romana's room, but from the tension in the air
the word Execute might have applied to Romana herself. His mouth was dry. He felt
he should say something to reassure the Doctor, but all that came out was, 'I'm sorry.
I just wondered . . .'

'This needs a quick decision, not a debate,' the Doctor snapped, as much to
himself as to Adric. Then he pressed the button.

Instantly the illumination in the console room flashed brighter. Adric breathed
again, and the Doctor turned to him and nodded, as if some profound truth had been
demonstrated. 'You see!' The time column began to wheeze into action. They had lost
Romana's room, and regained access to the space/time vortex.

The constable returned from the car and handed the key over to the inspector.

On inserting it into the lock the two officers witnessed an unusual chuffing sound.
Both raised their heads, mentally noting that the light on top of the box had begun
to flash.

The constable didn't think much about it, but the inspector voiced the speculation
that it must be some sort of new security arrangement. He found it harder to explain
what he saw next.

The inspector pushed the doors open while the constable stood back, ready to
help in the event of trouble. The first he knew of it was the expression on the face of
his superior. The inspector turned to him and hissed: 'There's some trick to this. Davis
- I want a ful report.' The constable followed the other's gaze towards the police box.
His mouth slowly sank open, as if in silent mimicry of its compact empty interior.

They were in flight. The oscillations of the flashing column that was the central
feature of the console were regular now, riding the time waves like a ping-pong ball
bobbing on the open sea. The Doctor was patching some hasty co-ordinates into the
panel to fill the forward reference he had to file for take-off - Adric understood that
much about programming the console - and some of the old liveliness had come back
into his eyes.



Adric was glad to be able to say something cheerful. 'We've done it, Doctor!
That other thing - if it was a TARDIS - must have gone.'

The Doctor turned from the console to face the boy: the light in his eyes had
been a trick of the twinkling reflections from the panel lights.

'Somehow I rather doubt it.'

He cast a second look at the oscillating column, then, assured that all was well
with the mechanism, took Adric by the arm and steered him towards the door that
lead to the TARDIS interior.

Adric found himself being ushered out into the corridor. 'What's the matter,
Doctor?' the boy asked, confused. 'Aren't you going to answer the bell?'

'This won't take a minute.'

'What won't?'

'Answering the bell,' said the Doctor as his head disappeared back into the
console room.

Adric blinked at the closed door. But before he had time to realise how hurt
and puzzled he was by the Doctor's behaviour, the door opened again. The Doctor
put something into his hand. 'Company while you're waiting. He's very strong on
patience.' The door closed.

The book was heavy, bound in dark-brown leather. Adric tipped it to look at the
spine and saw it was called The Complete Poetry of John Milton. Opening the book
brought a smell of distant classrooms. At the same time the corridor fell silent. The
cloister bell had stopped tolling.

Corridors! Tegan was sick of them. Whether you ran down them or walked, they
all wound into more corridors, or branched into junctions that lead again to corridors,
or perhaps opened out into halls, from whose tall archways sprang more junctions
that narrowed inevitably to yet more corridors.

Her state of mind had hardly been helped by the constant tolling, distant but
always with her. And now, as she paused for breath, it seemed to be ringing in her
head. She listened. It was in her head. Just in her head. It had stopped.

She was lost - inside a crazy little blue phone box. And there was no one to
help: just her, and the silence, and corridors from here to kingdom come. So when
she turned a corner and saw the patch of daylight through a distant arch, she ran to it
as a thirsty desert trekker might run to a water-hole.

The daylight was a mirage; but she only came to that realisation after she had
studied her surroundings for a long moment during which fear fought with curiosity,



and both were slowly overcome by a rising indignation at the absurdity of the place.
The ancient stone wal s and the pillars supporting the arched roof of the walkway that
circumscribed the courtyard, were all constructed inside a large dome. Some invisible
source bathed this great roof with a pale blue light in emulation of the sky, even as
far as the suggestion of clouds.

She sat down on a low bench and said aloud, 'This place is completely and utterly
daft.'

As if in answer the stone columns around her trembled slightly to the
reverberation of a faint whirring, chuffing sound. A patch of intense blue, attached to
no particular object, seemed to be forming in the middle of the courtyard. Vague at
first, it soon acquired corners and a flashing light on top.

Tegan stood up slowly, staring in broad-minded Australian disbelief at the police
box that had materialised in front of her eyes.

The book was al printed in short lines that wasted a lot of the paper on the right-
hand side of the page, and they gave the narrative a cumulating rhythm that Adric
found unpleasant at first. But as he got into the story - it was about flying people called
Angels who were at war against the Evil creatures that lived in a Burning Lake - the
rhythm seemed to help the way the story built up.

The Leader of the Burning-Lake Dwellers reminded Adric of the Master. Just as
theMaster had once been a Gallifreyan and was still a Time Lord, the evil character in
the story was refugee Angel. So although the landscape of the story, with its Thunder
and Lightning and Black Fire, was so obviously a fiction, this central correspondence
with the truth riveted Adric's interest.

He was ascending a huge staircase that lead to a gate built of gold and studded
with diamonds when he was jolted back from the book to the normality of the
TARDIS. The door was opening.

The Doctor stood in the doorway, his face pale under the wild curls of his hair.
'Well, now we know,' was al he said as he ushered Adric back inside.

'Know what?'

'The message was very faint. But it was from Traken all right.'

'Traken!' The bright angels flew from the boy's mind. 'How's Nyssa? What's
wrong?'

Taking time to choose his words carefully, the Doctor closed the door. Nyssa was
safe enough; it was from her that the message had come. But Tremas, her father, had
vanished. 'The Master must have had a second TARDIS hidden away somewhere,'
the Doctor concluded. 'There's no doubt now that he escaped from Traken.'



'And he's taken Tremas with him?'

The Doctor made a vague gesture of affirmation; he had said as much as he dared
tell the boy. Tremas, the brilliant Traken scientist and trusted Consul, had been a man
in his prime, whereas the Master was very near the end of his twelfth regeneration.
No Time Lord had survived the process for a thirteenth time. Clearly the Master had
been desperate.

Adric clutched at the Doctor's sleeve. 'Then where have they gone?'

The Doctor hesitated. He couldn't tell Adric of his fears that the Master had
physically taken over Tremas. Was he living in his body now? To achieve that was
beyond the capacity of a Time Lord alone, but with some of the power of the
Keepership still lingering . . .

Angry with himself, the Doctor suddenly thumped the console. He had the self-
control to choose a part some distance from the delicate array of needles, but the
percussion was still enough to set them jumping. 'I was so sure we'd got him . . . But
all the time he's been two moves ahead of me. He must have known I'd try to fix the
chameleon circuit.'

These were speculations he could share with the boy; indeed, he had to. After his
escape from Traken the Master must have come to Earth to lie in wait, wrapping his
own time machine invisibly around the police box. It was the only way to infiltrate
his superior technology into the Doctor's TARDIS.

There was one thing Adric didn't understand. 'But to know you were coming . . .
he must have read your mind?'

'He's a Time Lord too,' the Doctor brooded. 'In many ways we have the same
mind.'

Adric looked round the familiar walls of the console room and shuddered. If the
Doctor was right the Master was somewhere in the TARDIS, imbedded like a virus
in living flesh. If they landed in Logopolis they ran the risk of carrying the infection
to an innocent planet.

'Then we can't really land anywhere, can we?' the boy asked.

Adric heard himmutter something in reply, but the Doctor wasn't really listening.
His eye was wandering around the console room as if trying to trace the invisible
string of a long tangled thought. The thought seemed to begin with the console itself
and wind across the floor to the big double doors and then back again, eventually
ascending slowly up the walls to the ceiling.

The Doctor crossed to the small door that led to the TARDIS interior and pushed
it shut, examining the way it fitted into the door jamb. He seemed satisfied by what he
saw and went over to retrieve the TARDIS Manual from under one of the feet of the



hatstand, where the small book spent a lot of its time compensating for an inadequacy
in the hatstand design, or perhaps a slight unevenness of the floor.

The Doctor had been leafing backwards and forwards through the pages for
several minutes when he suddenly looked up brightly and said, 'Actually, there is one
way of getting rid of him. I'm just trying to work out how much damage it might do
to the TARDIS systems.'

The Doctor explained his dangerous idea. In principle it should be possible to
flush the Master out - literally - by the simple expedient of materialising the TARDIS
under water and opening the doors.

'Drown the TARDIS?' Adric exclaimed. 'But you can't!'

'I can and I have to,' said the Doctor flatly. 'And that is that.'

The strange pale blue light that seemed so like daylight must have been affecting
her eyes, Tegan decided. The object she was examining was as solid as anyone could
wish: a perfectly normal police box, even down to the stuff about police coming to
your assistance written on the front. It was everything else that was crazy. She
remembered

- if her memory hadn't gone completely bananas along with everything else -
that the crumbling stone courtyard she was in now, along with all that spaghetti of
corridors, was supposed to be inside one of those police box things. Tegan was
essentially a sensible girl, and she knew when she was out of her depth. What she had
to do now was find some official person, preferably the captain of the craft - and give
him a piece of her mind he would never forget.

She had walked round to the back of the police box by now, just in case there
was some trick to it. No, it looked, felt and smelled just like the real article. What
she didn't see, as she leaned against the blue wall at the back trying to work out some
positive plan of action, was the door at the front of the police box slowly edging open.



5

He thought it was a map at first. And then as the details on the viewer screen
grew larger Adric could see it was an aerial image of a real city. Traffic moved along
the grey veins of roads between the buildings, many of which were stained with age,
although patches of silver and glass highlighted some newer structures with gleams
of sunlight.

The main feature of the city was a thick grey-green river bangled with bridges. It
lay across the centre of the screen like a serpent sprawled across a patterned cushion.

The time column had stopped oscillating. They were hovering in mid-air.
'London,' announced the Doctor.

'Why not the sea?' asked Adric. 'You said there were a lot of oceans on this
planet.'

The Doctor crossed to the console and delicately re-set the co-ordinates. 'It's an
ancient tidal river called the Thames.' The watery burial of the TARDIS would be
taking place somewhere worthy of respect, he assured Adric.

'Besides, if we do it this way we won’t have so far to swim.'

The boy helped the Doctor with the first part of the elaborate preparations. They
had to close down most of the console system, and as the twinkling lights and little
coloured instrument panels went out one by one the reality of what the Doctor was
planning to do came home to Adric. A flood of water would sluice in and wash out
the whole TARDIS.

The console room, the corridors, the cloister room and the myriad rooms behind
doors he had never opened would be drowned under tons of thick green water. It
seemed such a drastic way of driving out the Master.

'But you can't just abandon the TARDIS.'

The Doctor passed an affectionate hand over the console. 'Yes, one does feel a
tremendous loyalty to the old thing after all these years.'

'I don't mean that, Doctor.' It seemed to Adric that the Time Lord was
overlooking the obvious again. 'Be practical. How are you going to get to Logopolis?'

The Doctor pul ed a switch and the secondary lights at the base of the time
column went out, leaving the console looking lifeless. The only working technology
in the room now seemed to be the viewer screen, which still showed the serpent motif
of the Thames.

'There's a gap in your education, Adric. Why are we going to Logopolis?'

'To repair the TARDIS.'

'And if we don't have a TARDIS?'



The Doctor began to walk round the console, double-checking that al the
switches were off.

'But we've got to have a TARDIS! What are you going to do for transport?'

'They also serve who only stand and wait,' said the Doctor simply, pointing to the
works of John Milton that Adric was still holding, 'or haven't you got to that bit yet?'

He approached the screen. 'We're partially materialised and hovering. There's
just enough power in the peripheral reserves to keep us up until I short the lines with
this lever. We'll drop the TARDIS . . . here.' He pointed to an area where the river
widened.

'Drop it?' The more Adric knew about the Doctor's plan the more dangerous it
seemed.

'Couldn't we just materialise under water?'

'This way we make sure we land in the right place. A gentle splash-down.'
Nevertheless, the Doctor made sure of getting a good handhold on the console and
persuaded Adric to do the same. 'Well . . . there may just be a slight jolt. Ready?'

Adric nodded uneasily. 'Yes . . . if you are?'

'That's not very affirmative,' replied the Doctor sourly. 'I'd feel more confident
if you just said "yes".'

They both held on tightly. The Doctor's hand closed on the lever.

Leaning against the back of the police box, Tegan glowered around the silly
courtyard with exasperation. In the absence of anybody to complain to or order about
she had begun to talk to herself, addressing herself by name.

'Right, Tegan. This is obviously some kind of elaborate joke, so we've got to
find some way of putting a stop to it. The shock's the worst thing, and that's over. So
everything's got to get better from here on in.'

What happened next showed that her powers of prophesy were as
underdeveloped as her geography, as far as the TARDIS was concerned. Although
nothing of her surroundings changed in the few moments that followed, she
experienced a sudden, deeply unpleasant sensation that made her heart pound. It was
like being in a lift that has taken it into its head to make a violent downward lurch.

She clung to the police box for support, feeling indignation and alarm, in that
order.

Then just as everything seemed stabilised again, a massive shock wave came up
through the floor, cascading loose rubble from the stone walls and sending her flying.



She picked herself up from the flagstones. 'This is just too much. It's
unbelievable.'

Apart from the dust her uniform was undamaged, although she could feel numb
places on her body that were bound to turn into bruises. 'Crazy idiot of a pilot. Wait
till I have a word with him . . .'

And then she froze. From the other side of the police box she heard a sound.
If she had been convinced it was human she would have described it as laughter; a
hollow, light chuckle.

She remained still. Nothing happened. Without moving from the spot, Tegan
called out cautiously, 'Who . . . who is that?'

The same terrifying judder threw Adric up onto the console, and he came to rest
against the stationary time column. Not until the reverberations had died down did he
open his eyes. The first thing he saw was a sprawling heap of red coat, curls and scarf
from which the odd arm and leg jutted out. The heap gathered itself together on the
console room floor, and the Doctor's face grinned up at him.

'Adric? Still with us?'

The boy slid down from his perch and helped his companion to his feet. It wasn't
his idea of a 'gentle splash-down' and he told the Doctor as much. The Doctor tried
to make light of it. 'Must have touched the bottom.' When he had finished brushing
himself down he noticed that the boy was still glowering at him in an unfriendly way.
'Look on the bright side, Adric. We were very lucky the water was there to break
our fall.'

Tegan's eyes darted around the cloisters, trying to detect among the stony
shadows the figure whose presence she felt as a dank chill. The echo around the
walkways made it impossible to locate the low chuckle precisely, but fear was urging
her backwards towards the arch that had first brought her into the room.

She touched the flaky masonry of the wall behind her, but what she had mistaken
for an archway in the quick glance she had allowed herself turned out to be nothing
more than a shallow alcove that rustled with ivy. Still not daring to take her eyes off
the danger in front of her, she began to feel her way along the wall.

The echo of that chilling sound floated through the walkway again, closer now.
There was still nothing to see - or rather everything to see: darkly moving leaves
among the foliage, deeper shadows within the shadows.

The Doctor was standing with his back pressed hard against the doors, and his
feet planted firmly on the TARDIS floor, as if getting ready to hold back a battalion
of battering rams. Adric was by the console, manning the door lever.



The Doctor went through it briefly once more, to make sure the boy understood.
The trick was not to attempt to swim out while the water was rushing in. They would
tread water and breathe while air remained in the console room; then when the influx
had steadied they could pull themselves out through the double doors using handholds
on the fittings. Until they got out into the open river attempts to swim were bound to
end in being swept down by the current into the interior of the craft.

'And be careful,' said the Doctor finally. 'The water pressure could send us both
flying.'

Then the Doctor gave the word. As soon as Adric had pulled the lever he ran
over to the Doctor to help him with the doors, putting his back up against them and
digging in his feet. Now that the security mechanism was released he had imagined
it would take all his strength to hold back the flood, letting the water seep in slowly
at first, just as the Doctor planned. In fact it was as easy as leaning against a wal .

After a moment of getting the feel of the doors - this too was part of the Doctor's
carefully developed plan - the boy looked at the Time Lord. The same question was
in both their minds.

'Perhaps,' said the Doctor slowly, 'we're not down very deep.'

'Deep?' replied Adric. 'There's no pressure on these doors at all.'

The Doctor paused, though he still didn't dare to let the doors go. 'I think you're
right,' he said at last.

'I am right.'

'Very good, Adric. Very affirmative.'

Together they straightened up and stepped into the middle of the room. There
was no less stateliness than usual about the way the massive doors steadily opened
inwards.

And no torrent followed, not even a trickle. With an embarrassed glance at his
young companion, the Doctor walked out of the TARDIS and found himself standing
on a wooden floating pontoon moored by the river's edge.

The pontoon had been eroded by the river and woodworm and time - mostly
by time. It was a miracle the TARDIS hadn't gone straight through it. As it was, the
planking had broken under the impact and the base of the TARDIS had been forced
into it for a couple of feet, coming to rest against a metal girder that underpinned the
wooden structure.

The Doctor looked around the deserted riverside. On both banks abandoned
dockland stretched as far as the eye could see, a landscape of rusty skeleton buildings
wreathed in weeds. The water that rocked the pontoon from below was thick with
greasy green algae. But for the motion it looked solid enough to walk on.



'There you are, you see,' the Doctor said to the boy, who stepped out behind him.
'I knew there'd be a perfectly simple explanation.'

Adric was glad of the Doctor's assurance that nothing serious had gone wrong
with the plan. The initials TARDIS stood for TimeAnd Relative Dimensions In Space
machine, and it was a well-documented fault in the Type 40 model that sometimes
the time dimension was a little less relative to the other dimensions than it should be.
According to the Doctor's diagnosis they had arrived at exactly the right spot - but a
century or two too late. In the interim the bend in the river had silted up, moving the
bank, and with it the pontoon.

Although perfectly satisfactory as an explanation the Doctor seemed unhappy
with it, as though the event were hedged about with other quite different - and perhaps
unspeakable - possibilities. As the Doctor grew pensive, Adric became aware of the
whistle of wind through the girders of a bridge that arched the river a little way
upstream. The Doctor was staring at the bridge.

'Wel , we nearly got it right,' Adric said as cheerfully as he could.

The Doctor stepped gingerly along the swaying pontoon for a better view of the
bridge.

'Nearly - but not quite right,' he said absently. 'There's something not quite right
about all of this. Before the police came, I saw something . . . somebody. Faintly, in
the distance.'

Adric's mouth was dry when he came to speak the name. 'The Master?'

'The Master . . . perhaps that was it. Or perhaps . . .' The Doctor's voice tailed off
into a chilling silence. His eye had come to rest on something high up on the bridge
that overlooked them. Adric could swear the pale, vaguely defined figure hadn't been
there the moment before. The distance made it quite impossible to distinguish any
details of the face, but Adric knew positively that the solitary figure was looking
directly at his companion.

Eventually the Doctor said, in a strange harsh tone that was quite new to Adric,
'Nothing like this has ever happened before.' Andwithout taking his eyes off the figure
on the bridge, he gestured to Adric to stay by the TARDIS. 'I've got to get to the
bottom of this,'

was the Doctor's parting remark, as he left him to cross the broken pontoon
towards the bank. He picked his way through the weeds and rubble, making for the
bridge where the watching figure stood translucent against the sky.

At first the figure didn't move, except to keep his face towards the Doctor, who
was now scrambling over the rusty girders that littered the approach to the bridge.
Then Adric saw the mysterious observer detach himself from his point of vigil and
move towards the Doctor. Like a pair of duellists they met on the bridge, facing each
other.



The bargaining began; at least it seemed like bargaining fromwhere Adric stood.
The Doctor's scarf blew wildly in the wind, mimicking the earnest gesticulations of
its owner.

Whatever the Doctor was saying, the other's replies came more slowly and were
less animated. But far from calming the Doctor down, they only seemed to be stirring
him on to greater agitation. And then the Doctor was turning to gesture towards Adric,
as if the boy's presencewas somehowpart of the debate. But whatever point theDoctor
was trying to make, the other seemed obstinately to reject.

Adric's fear crystallised into a single thought: the Doctor was face to face with
somebody - or something - of which he too was terribly afraid.

There had been no sound from the stone pillars or the police box for a long time
now, only the rustle of the ivy she moved against in groping her way along the wall.
But never for a moment did Tegan dare take her eyes off the courtyard in front of her:
somewhere among those crumbling pillars, those small ragged trees, that invisible
mocking presence must still be lurking. Then, close by her ear, came a sudden sharp
bat-squeak, and a gust of air chilled her cheek. Tegan almost jumped out of her skin.

It was a door, unoiled for centuries, moving in the breeze from somewhere
outside. At last there was a way out! She rushed through it, slamming it shut behind
her.

She was back in the network of those endlessly winding corridors. Round and
round, she thought, like a hamster in a cage.

The Doctor marched into the console room, followed by Adric. 'Door,' snapped
the Doctor.

Adric ran to work the lever, his head bristling with questions. But the Doctor
was rapidly flicking switches on the console, bringing the colony of little lights and
panels back to life. 'Co-ordinates. Come on, come on . . . Co-ordinates - are they set?'

'Where are we going?'

'Logopolis, of course. Set?'

At a nod from his companion the Doctor pulled the dematerialisation lever and
the time column began to flash and oscillate. At least everything was working; that
was reassuring. But Adric found the Doctor's drastic changes of plan very unnerving,
and so was the gloomy silence that settled over the console room once they were in
flight . . .

Adric's voice was small in the huge silence. 'Doctor? What . . . what happened
out there?'



'I have dipped into the future,' the Doctor replied, as if to himself. His face was
a mask, animated only by the steady pumping light from the time column.

The journey to Logopolis seemed to go on for ever. Eventually, when the Doctor
detached himself from the console and began to pace the floor, walking in
disconcerting unison with the oscillations of the time column, Adric could bear the
tension no longer.

'Aren't you going to tell me anything about it?'

'Of course,' the Doctor replied, making a concerted effort to cheer up. 'Wel , as
much as I can. Which isn't very much . . .'

What it was that stopped him revealing everything he didn't say. Adric was able
to deduce that the Doctor's concern with his own fate and that of the TARDIS was
now almost a trivial matter. His fears were focused now on some future event or series
of events that he was only able to describe obliquely.

'On Earth they cal it "bad luck". A chain of circumstances that seems to fragment
the laws that hold the universe together. We're in for a run of it, a storm of it, a positive
earthquake of "bad luck".' Then he took Adric by the shoulders and spoke to him face
to face.

'The Master is a Time Lord - and that means we have an obligation to deal with
him ourselves without endangering others.'

'Keep it in the family,' Adric agreed. 'And we will.'

'Not we, Adric. You are one of the others.'

The boy flushed. 'But I can help you . . . can't I?'

'In the ordinary way, yes, invaluable. But this is something far too dangerous.'

A remark of the Doctor's had puzzled Adric. As a Time Lord he was always
dipping into the future; that was precisely what had made the phrase so chilling. The
answer was now written in the Doctor's eyes. He was talking about a kind of future
normally closed to him - and that could only mean his own.

'The man on the high bridge told you about the "bad luck"!'

The Doctor nodded, and Adric drew a sharp breath. 'So it was the Master out
there.

You've done a deal with him!'

The Doctor's eyes narrowed. 'How do you deduce that?'

'I just guessed,' the boy said.



'Never guess unless you have to. There's quite enough uncertainty in the world
already.'

And he didn't say another word until it was time to land in Logopolis.

The Doctor deemed it polite to show himself first, by way of warning the
Logopolitans of his arrival. He put the TARDIS into hover mode above the City and
flicked on the viewer screen.

The two travellers looked down on a huge shallow dome smoothed out of the
pale rose natural rock. Swirling involutions etched deep into its surface: these seemed
to be the city streets, for in the depths of the pink shadows Adric could just make
out cave-like holes that he took to be dwelling-places. Apart from a few tiny moving
figures there was little sign of life. From the perspective of the hovering TARDIS the
City of Logopolis looked like a giant brain.

At one end the rock piled up into a mound that might have been a single large
building -

some kind of scientific establishment, Adric deduced from the massive parabolic
antenna mounted above it. A transmission site, perhaps?

The Doctor approached the screen and looked hard at the big skeletal bowl of
the aerial, unable to answer Adric's question. 'Must be a recent addition. There'll be
plenty of time to find out all about it.'

He touched a button on the console and the TARDIS began to move across the
City to where the smooth dome of rock graduated into a flat plateau. Then, as they
prepared to land the most extraordinary thing happened.

The door leading to the inner part of the TARDIS opened with a bang. Tear-
stained, showing signs of her exhaustingwanderings through themaze of the TARDIS
corridors, the red-haired girl in the purple uniform marched into the room.

Tegan's voice exploded like a shrapnel-bomb in the quiet of the console room.
'I demand to see whoever is in charge of this ship.'



6

The plateau at the north end of the City was flat and open, overlooking a horizon
of pale rose sands that merged mistily into the opalescent sky. But the silent figures in
flowing dark robes had not gathered in the High Place to look across that breathtaking
view. As more of their number spilled in from the direction of the City, stepping out
from the shallow gullies which in their southward development became the myriad
alleys of dwelling places, all eyes were turned towards the materialising blue police
box.

Their Leader was a man of about sixty, though from his assured posture and the
shine of his skin beneath his short steel-grey hair he seemed to be in his prime. The
crowd around the TARDIS thickened and the Leader stepped forward to greet the
Doctor.

But rather rudely in the face of all this hospitality the TARDIS door remained
closed.

Tegan was the cause of the trouble. She stood defiantly in front of the console,
facing the Doctor and Adric.

'I've told you - Tegan Jovanka. It's my name. And before I answer any more
questions, I want to know exactly who you are.'

Adric briskly introduced himself and the Doctor.

'And this,' said the Doctor, pointing at the viewer screen which now displayed
the sombrely dressed crowd gathering around the TARDIS, 'is Logopolis. Where I
happen to have some urgent business. What am I going to do with you?'

Tegan had a very positive answer. 'You can take me right back where you found
me.

My aunt is waiting in her car to take me to the airport.'

The Doctor had just taken the data block out of the memory management system
and was on the point of reaching for the door lever. 'Your aunt? A plump brown-
haired woman? A red sports car?'

Tegan was taken aback. 'You know Aunt Vanessa?'

'I've . . . er . . . seen very little of her,' the Doctor prevaricated.

'Right, that settles it. You'll have to come with us.' He levered open the door,
waving Adric and Tegan out towards the waiting Logopolitans.

At that moment there was no blue police box inside the cloister room. A
handsome dark green tree of the variety Prunus Laurocerasus, or cherry laurel, had,
however, become apparently firmly rooted in the ground a little distance from where



the Doctor, Adric and Tegan emerged to face the welcoming party. The Master's
TARDIS did not suffer from the same defects as the Doctor's. In particular, the
chameleon circuit was working perfectly.

The Doctor allowed the Leader of the Logopolitans to conclude his short speech
of welcome. Crisp, well-regimented applause illustrated that Logopolis was indeed
honoured by the Doctor's visit.

'Nice of you to put it like that, Monitor,' said the Doctor. 'I arrive . . .' he threw a
meaningful look towards Tegan ' . . . with a somewhat enlarged entourage. But we're
very honoured to be here.'

Tegan was about to raise her voice in protest, but Adric lifted his finger
authoritatively to his lips, a trick the Doctor often used.

The Doctor and the Monitor began to saunter towards the pink folds of rock that
led to the City. Promising to explain everything if she promised in turn not to make a
fuss in front of all these important people, Adric induced Tegan to follow.

'Time has changed little for either of us, Doctor,' the Monitor observed. 'You
continue to roam the universe, and we persist in our simple existence on this planet.'

The Doctor laughed. 'That antenna on the other side of the city - far from simple,
I should have said.'

'Occasionally our researches require what is sometimes called ‘technology’.'
With a generous sweep of his hand theMonitor acknowledged the Doctor's point. 'But
for the most part our computations are enough.'

The gully they were walking along had grown into a small, smooth-shouldered
canyon.

Logopolis began here. Adric detached himself fromTegan's whispered questions
long enough to look closely at the caves he had noticed from the TARDIS; he now
saw they were square, open-fronted cel s carved from the rock on either hand. At first
they dotted the walls intermittently, but as the Doctor's entourage drew closer to the
heart of the City the perforations became more regular, until eventually they were
completely adjacent, with only a column width separating each cell, row upon row of
them, winding the full distance of every street.

The crowd, that had been following at a respectful distance, was now
diminishing. One by one the Logopolitans left the procession, each taking up his
station at the entrance of his small, well-ordered dwelling.

The air had begun to chirrup to a sound that might have come from a swarm of
large crickets. The Doctor was so deeply engaged in his philosophical exchange with
his distinguished host that he seemed not to hear it. Adric couldn't explain it to Tegan -

there was a lot that he hadn't been able to explain - but at that moment they turned
a corner that looked down into a street they had already passed.



A Logopolitan sat at the entrance to each cell working beads on a kind of small
frame held on his lap. 'They're just like abacuses!' Tegan exclaimed. As he clicked
his beads each seemed to be chanting softly under his breath, and Adric remembered
what the Doctor had said about the muttering and intonation. Waves of information
were being passed from cell to cell, calculated upon and then passed on again to the
next. It was like being in the middle of a huge, living calculating machine.

The canyons became tall. The Monitor lead them towards a building that was
far larger than the rest, boasting what appeared from the layout of the windows to
be several storeys. They mounted the flight of steps that lead to the big rectangular
entrance.

What was left of the crowd remained outside. Tegan was thankful at least to find
the air cooler in the large hall. And then there were more of the same pink steps, before
they entered a room that was quite different from the other architecture she had seen.
Its surfaces were perfectly even and rectangular, certainly not carved from the rock.

'Our Central Register,' the Monitor announced.

'You have been busy, Monitor,' said the Doctor, handing over the data block.
'All this is new.'

'And more than we need for our immediate researches. Back-up facilities.' The
Monitor took the data block over to a long grey work-station that ran the entire length
of the wall and settled himself in front of what looked at first like a black console
screen. Adric expected some picture to appear there when the Monitor put the data
block in front of it.

But instead the Logopolitan leaned forward and, consulting the data block from
time to time, began to whisper. Adric edged closer and saw that what he had taken to
be a screen was a dark cavity in the wall.

The sound was meaningless to Adric. It was composed of short words that the
Monitor articulated with great clarity, carefully separating each from the next as
though every syllable were precious. Somehow Adric was reminded of the words in
the story about the Angel. But the rhythm in the Monitor's incantation owed much to
the fact that the same sounds kept coming round again and again.

'Kayrie gorrock gorrock kayrie zel. Kayrie nerus nerus kayrie zel. Kayrie av
kayrie av perdunesta zel. Ressa carra otto perdunesta zel . . .'

Out in the narrow streets the susurration of sound was changing, taking on the
shifting rhythms of the Monitor's voice as the new whispered numbers chained from
cel to cell.

The abacuses began to clack their calculations, building to a fugue that echoed
through street after winding street.



At the very edge of Logopolis the sound of the whole city blended into the moan
of the wind hurrying over the plateau from the stretch of rosy sands below. Two
objects dominated the high flat ground: the TARDIS and a plump, cherry laurel tree,
whose dark-green, glossy foliage marked it as an unlikely product of that stony soil.

And then there was no tree.

Suddenly, with no intermediate stage, in the place of the succulent green shape
stood an architectural pillar, stocky, yellowing and fluted. Only the subtlest hint of the
laurel tree remained, in the outline of the sharp-toothed, lance-shaped leaves carved
around the base and the capital. The pillar stayed there for a moment, rather as a
dragon-fly waits for its wings to dry in the sun. And then, with a chuffing, whirring
sound, it dissolved from sight.

The Monitor rose from the console and turned to the Doctor. 'The code is being
compiled.'

'Thank you, Monitor. I'm certainly looking forward to having a properly
functioning TARDIS.'

'Is this business going to take long?' Tegan demanded.

The compilation would only take a matter of minutes, the Monitor assured them.
This wasn't enough to calm Tegan down - nothing was. The Doctor, who still needed
to clear up some points of detail with the Monitor about how the new figures were to
be re-entered into the TARDIS system, appealed with a silent gesture to Adric. Do
shut her up, his glance suggested.

'It's not the Doctor's fault youwandered on board,' the boy said, matching Tegan's
aggression with a little of his own. He contrived at the same time to draw her to the
window, well away from where the Doctor and the Monitor were trying to have a
civilised discussion.

'Wandered? That ship was deliberately disguised as a police box. Talk about
flying under false colours.'

'Yes, I'd better explain about the TARDIS. You see, there's this thing called the
chameleon circuit. It's simplest to look at it as a sort of logical gearing between the
real-world interface and the internal quasi-dimensional continuum . . .' In mind-
numbing detail, Adric began his discourse.

Below the window the winding streets bristled with whispers and the clack of
abacuses.

In each cell entrance sat a Logopolitan, flicking his beads and intoning the
information on to the next. The cells were the simplest of living quarters: a pal et on
the floor, a few cooking implements hanging from hooks on the wall, and around the
perimeter of the small white-washed room a neat collection of rectangular tablets that
might have been the Logopolitan equivalent of books.



One cel in all that winding chain was more elaborately furnished than the rest,
although the occupant sitting at the entrance was too absorbed in the business of 'the
Numbers'

to realise it at the time. Behind him, at the rear of the cell, a stout, yellowing,
fluted pillar had formed, reaching from roof to ceiling.

The savage sizzling sound that echoed round the cell went unheard on the street
outside, drowned beneath the rising susurration. Quite suddenly, the stool where the
Logopolitan had been sitting was empty; the abacus had fallen to the floor. Beside it
lay the occupant, immobile, eyes staring at ceiling, diminished to the size of a dol .

While the whispers and clacking of abacus beads rose to a pitch, Adric was
coming to the end of his short lecture on the chameleon circuit's functioning - or rather,
reasons for not functioning. He had told her everything he knew on the subject, and
what he did not know he had invented. At least it kept Tegan quiet until the Monitor
returned from the console with the results of the compilation.

'This will restore your chameleon circuit, Doctor,' said the Monitor.

'Splendid, Monitor.' The Doctor took the data block. 'The TARDIS and I have
been looking forward to this.'

They were moving towards the door when the Doctor paused to look around him.
'You know, Monitor, there's something rather familiar about this room. But none of
this was here last time I came.'

'Your extensive travels put us stay-at-homes to shame, Doctor. Doubtless on one
of your trips to the planet Earth you have visited the Pharos Project.'

The Doctor snapped his fingers. 'Of course, the Pharos Project!' Then he realised
he was no wiser, and had to ask 'What about the Pharos Project?'

'And what is a Pharos, anyway?' Adric interjected.

The Doctor was strong on Ancient Greek and replied before the Monitor had a
chance to speak. 'Means a lighthouse. It's the name of a famous Earth project designed
to transmit messages to remote planets.'

'I understand they're trying to get intelligent life to respond,' the Monitor added.

The Doctor smiled. 'But the life is too intelligent to do that before it knows what
the Earth people are up to!' He was looking round the room again, and suddenly turned
to the Monitor. 'Of course! This is almost identical to the Pharos computer room . . .'

'I always thought you underestimated our Logopolitan skills,' said the Monitor
with some pride. 'It's a perfect logical copy.'



'Block transfer computation!' exclaimed Adric, not wanting to be left out of the
conversation.

'That . . . and a little more,' the Monitor agreed. 'You see, structure is the essence
of matter.'

'And the essence of structure is mathematics!' Adric added excitedly. He had
grasped the point, and was keen to let everybody know it. By mathematically
modelling the Pharos Project in sufficient detail and supplying the necessary raw
energy, the Logopolitans had been able to re-create whole sections of the Earth
structure on their own planet.

On the steps down to the street the Doctor said, 'In that case, Monitor, you must
be able to model any space/time event in the universe.'

'Yes, true,' replied the Monitor modestly. 'But for the moment let's content
ourselves with solving your little problem, Doctor.'

No wonder they think so little of travelling, the Doctor mused to himself. On
their journey back to the TARDIS the party gathered another following of flowing-
robed Logopolitans.

The Doctor drew the Monitor out of earshot of Tegan and Adric and said in a
low voice 'I wonder if I can ask you a very special favour, Monitor?'

'My dear Doctor . . . of course.'

'I need this repair rather urgently,' said the Doctor, choosing his words carefully,
'because what lies ahead for me is . . . not for them. I'll have to leave them here,

Adric and the girl. Would they be too much of a burden?'

'I'm sure we can make them comfortable, Doctor.' The Monitor was puzzled, but
it would have been a breach of etiquette to press questions.

They had arrived at the TARDIS a little ahead of the others. The Doctor turned to
his old acquaintance. 'I'll be back when I can. Which, to be frank with you, Monitor,
will be soon

- or not at all.'

The Doctor's handshake was firm. He lowered his voice and added, 'I hate
farewells. I hope you won't mind a small deception to keep this simple.'

TheMonitor understood immediately. 'You don't want them in the TARDISwith
you?'

Tegan and Adric caught up with them at this point, in time to hear the Doctor
say, as if in reply to a remark of the Monitor's, 'Dangerous, eh? How dangerous?'

The Monitor took his cue. 'Well . . . there's a chance the computation may
produce . . .



an instability.'

The Doctor seemed to take a moment to ponder the question. Then he turned to
Adric and Tegan. 'An elementary eggs and basket situation, wouldn't you say? Not
to put all of the one in the other.'

Adric tried to protest, but the Doctor persuaded him that even though there might
be only one chance in seven hundred million of the process going wrong it was still
silly to jeopardise more lives than necessary. Tegan saw the sense of that. Then, with
the tiniest wink to the Monitor the Doctor disappeared through the blue double doors.

Adric wouldn't let the matter rest. He turned to the Monitor. 'Then the Doctor is
in danger? He said he was expecting danger - great danger, he said.'

TheMonitor smiled at Adric's agitation. 'A simple precaution. There is very little
that can go wrong.' But seeing the alarm still on the boy's face he felt compelled to
add: 'In fact, I must confess, nothing at all . . . I'm afraid I misled the Doctor in order
to have the pleasure of your company while he engages on this mundane task. Now,
perhaps you'd like to see more of Logopolis . . .'

'No offence to you personally, but I'd prefer to see a lot less of it.' The Monitor's
high diplomacy calmed Tegan, but it didn't stop her speaking her mind. 'Can you give
me some idea how long we're going to be delayed here. I do have a job to do.'

Adric apologised to the Monitor for his brash companion. 'I'm sorry. She's
upset . . .'

'Too right I'm upset,' Tegan declared. 'Wouldn't you be?' But if she was honest
with herself she had to admit it was kind of exciting too. At the interview for the job
they had asked her what her hobbies were, and she'd said 'Flying and travelling'. If
that committee of stiff-necked personnel officers could only see her now!

'That's very odd,' said Adric. 'It looks like . . . Nyssa!' He was peering past Tegan
at some distant point behind her. She turned to see a small female figure standing
on the skyline, right on the edge of the plateau. She seemed to have appeared from
nowhere.

The girl began walking towards the group round the TARDIS. And then she
waved.

Adric's mouth opened in astonishment. 'It is Nyssa!'

The figure was running now. 'It's the girl who helped us on Traken,' Adric had
time to explain, before Nyssa's arms were wrapped round him in an embarrassing hug
of greeting.

Tegan shook Nyssa's hand. 'Hi, I'm Tegan. Did they hijack you too?'



The brown curls bounced around her pale young face as Nyssa shook her head.
'A friend of the Doctor's brought me. He's here somewhere.'

They looked around, but there was nobody but themselves and the Logopolitans.

'A friend of the Doctor's?' asked Adric. 'Are you sure?'

Nyssa's serious round eyes echoed surprise that he should doubt her word. 'Of
course.

Is the Doctor here?'

Adric pointed to the TARDIS, and Tegan added, 'He's trying out some kind of
new trim for the machine. Have you seen inside that thing? It's the most amazing . . .'

Tegan broke off abruptly, struck by something about the appearance of the
TARDIS.

During the arrival of Nyssa the Monitor had drawn closer to it, some doubt
creasing his normally smooth features. Tegan looked at the time machine, unable to
define what it was that was so evidently wrong. But turning to Adric and Nyssa she
realised that they saw it too.

The colour was too bright! And as they watched, it quickly became brighter,
until it was fluorescing violently.

At first Adric wasn't convinced it was a fault. 'It's the chameleon circuit. The
Doctor's reprogramming it...,' he explained to Nyssa. But they could all see the look
of alarm on the face of the Monitor and his fel ow Logopolitans. Adric rushed to the
Monitor's side.

'What's the matter?'

'A transfer instability. It may be only momentary.'

The Monitor seemed to be right. The fluorescence was visibly dying down.
Instinctively, Adric, Nyssa and Tegan pressed forward, but the Monitor gestured to
them to stay back.

'Something is wrong!' Adric cried.

At first it seemed like a trick of the light, some reaction of the eyes to the
fluorescing.

But as they watched it became clear without any doubt. The TARDIS was
smaller!

Tegan turned to the Monitor. 'You'd better do something,' she snapped.

The Logopolitan shook his head in dull amazement. 'I don't understand . . . I
don't understand . . .'



'Look!' Nyssa exclaimed, although all eyes were already on the TARDIS. 'It's
still shrinking!'

Alarm was spreading among the gathering of Logopolitans, who were drawing
back from the sight. The TARDIS was now no taller than a man's height, and still
diminished slowly as they watched.

Adric grabbed the Monitor's arm. 'But the Doctor's in there!' he shouted. At a
distance from the horrified crowd, elevated by the height of the smooth fold of rock
on which he stood, the translucent watching figure remained immobile, waiting his
time. And he knew that time was coming. But not yet - not quite yet.



7

The Doctor's young friends pressed in around the Monitor, and Tegan's voice
was louder than the others. 'It's your numbers doing this. You must be able to do
something to put it right.'

'Quick! Please, we must get him out of this!' Adric demanded, tugging at the
Monitor's sleeve.

A greyness glazed over the fine features of the Logopolitan. 'This is unheard
of . . . A fault in the computations?' He pushed his fingers, some ornamented with
simple rings, through the neat silver curls of his hair. Then the moment of hesitation
was over. In a voice crisp with authority he spoke to the distressed crowd around him.
'Collect the visitor's machine. The honour of Logopolis is at stake.'

And Adric thought he heard him add under his breath, 'And more than our
honour . . .

much, much more.'

The TARDIS was now no bigger than a large cabin trunk, and even a child of ten
would have had to stoop to get in through the miniature door. It was still fluorescing
intermittently, but its surface didn't seem to be hot to the touch when the Logopolitans
hoisted gently it into a horizontal position.

Nyssa had run forward to supervise the lifting of the TARDIS. Now as the
procession swept towards the city she fell into step beside the Monitor.

'What are you going to do with the Doctor?'

The Logopolitan Leader turned his head towards her gravely. 'Our best. That is
all we can do.'

And they hurried on to the Central Register through the winding maze of
Logopolis, not knowing if the Doctor, inside that shrunken and still shrinking toy,
was alive or dead.

The Doctor himself was little wiser. He had been only part of the way through
the tedious business of reading the figures off the data block and keying them at the
console when the room began to fill with an insidious buzzing sound, like an infuriated
mosquito caught in a jam jar.

It was then that the distortions started. He first noticed a curious truncation of the
time column, as if he were looking down on it from the perspective of the ceiling. His
own hands, working at the keyboard, suddenly seemed a long way off. The buzzing
grew, until he wasn't sure whether his head was in the room or the room was in his
head. As he folded to his knees the floor rose smoothly to meet him halfway, like a
well filling with dark oil.



An idea came swimming towards him through the thick buzzing blackness:
dematerialise. Whatever was causing the spatial anomaly might be local. There was
a chance of escape, if only...

The console was a giant mushroom that towered miles above him. He tried to
struggle to his feet against some huge pressure. But he fought it, and eventually in
agonising slow motion his knees straightened, and he found himself thin and tall,
stretched like an over-tightened violin string between ceiling and floor.

His hand, almost an independent creature at the end of his long arm, managed to
pull the dematerialisation lever. The buzzing continued to grow. He tried to conjure
power from the auxiliary buttons arrayed around the lever, but still nothing worked -
only the viewer screen, which was now filled with a jolting picture of rose-coloured
rock perforated by shadows that the Doctor's brain only dimly registered as a hugely
magnified image of a Logopolitan street.

And still the buzzing grew louder and higher in pitch until his whole body
vibrated to it.

And then, as if the violin string had snapped, the Doctor staggered and col apsed
to the floor.

The procession of dark-robed figures hurried on with the tiny TARDIS.
Logopolitan courtesy, and a real concern, made each one anxious to accompany the
Doctor to the Central Register, so on this occasion the streets behind them were left
rimmed with empty cells. There was, however, one cell on the route that was not
empty.

From behind a yellowing, fluted column set just inside one of the dwelling places
a face appeared, dark and spikily bearded. The thin lips parted, uttering a chuckle dry
as the dust that was still settling in the train of the receding procession.

'At last, Doctor!' smiled the Master. 'At last I've cut you down to size.'

The Doctor knew nothing of the proximity of his oldest and deadliest enemy,
indeed at that moment he knew little of anything. The TARDIS viewer offered a
juddering succession of clues: a sea of serious faces, pink stone walls, flashes of bright
sky. The image of a large building, approached by a flight of steps, lurched across
the screen.

And then a carved stone staircase, followed by the sharp white light, streaming
from the interior of a lofty room, where the jolting giant images finally came to rest.
Gargantuan in proportion, the face of Adric loomed in, filling the viewer screen.
Behind him the ballooning features of Tegan and Nyssa signalled the vast scale of
their concern.

The Doctor saw none of this. His crumpled figure lay at the foot of the screen,
inert beneath the weight of that unstoppable buzzing.



By the time they had reached the Central Register the TARDIS had been small
enough for two Logopolitans to carry. They set it upright and now stood back, waiting
for new orders from the Monitor.

Adric, Tegan and Nyssa knelt around it. The fluorescing had died down, and in
every respect the TARDIS looked entirely ordinary - except that there was now no
room for anything larger than a new-born kitten through that doll's-house door.

'Hold on, Doctor. The Monitor is going to help us.'

But there was no point in Nyssa calling, Adric pointed out. The Doctor might be
able to see his surroundings on the TARDIS screen, but due to a long-standing fault
it couldn't carry sound.

Adric straightened up and looked around him. He felt so powerless in this alien
room with its high white walls and rectangular racks of equipment whose purpose he
could only guess at. He remembered what the Monitor had said: it was a logical copy
of the Pharos Project. Why had they made the copy of a computer instal ation when
Logopolitan computations ran without computers?

The Monitor was stationed in front of the long grey console. That part of the
installation must be Logopolitan in origin, thought Adric, the hub from which 'the
Numbers'

emanated, and to which the computations returned. Just as he had done before,
the Monitor was leaning forward, intoning into the black aperture that Adric had first
mistaken for a screen.

'Etra secque secque eram nol. Etra secque kayrie gorrock gorrock kayrie zel.
Kayrie nerus nerus kayrie zel . . .'

The soundwas hypnotic. And then Adric almost jumped out of his skin as a sharp
grating noise split the air close behind him. One component of the Earth technology
had sprung to life, a flat cream-coloured box, the front panel of which now glowed
with light.

Adric deduced from the paper covered with figures that emerged from the top
that it was a sort of primitive printing mechanism.

The Monitor was beside him now, reaching to tear off the print-out. 'It's
somewhere in the dimensioning routine,' their host pronounced, scanning the paper.
'We can trace it, if there's time.

'Perhaps I can help?' Adric suggested. He explained about the Alzarian Badge
for Mathematical Excellence - not boastfully, but just so that the Monitor would
understand he wasn't dealing with an ordinary boy who would only get in the way.

The Logopolitan Leader explained that the printer was producing a machine-
code dump of the routine that had caused the trouble. 'Can you read Earth numbering?'
he asked.



He tore off the print-out and handed it to Adric, who studied it for a moment.

'Yes,' the boy said. 'The Doctor taught me.

'It's a copy of an Earth machine, so I'm afraid we have to make do with their
clumsy symbols.'

It was in hexadecimal notation, using Arabic digits up to nine followed by the
first six letters of what was called the Roman alphabet, so that the first fifteen numbers
could be represented by a single character. In some ways it was a complicated way of
counting, instead of the more usual Earth notation which used only as many symbols
as there are fingers and thumbs on the human hand. But ten is a very awkward number,
the Doctor had explained, only divisible by two and five. The hexadecimal notation
was based on the number sixteen, which can be halved four times, and then produces
perfect unity.

The Monitor signalled to Adric to follow him. 'I must check the External
Registers. Read it to me as we go.'

Tegan had been kneeling beside Nyssa, watching the TARDIS closely for the
past fewminutes. It was still shrinking visibly, though the rate seemed to have slowed.
She saw Adric and the Monitor leaving the room, and scrambled to her feet to follow
them. But in the doorway she stopped and looked down the length of the hall they
had entered. One long wall that stretched away into the distance as far as she could
see was lined with dark-robed figures, each seated before a console that was a scaled-
down version of the Monitor's in the Central Register. They spoke earnestly into the
apertures in front of them, filling the room with the rhythmic incantation of 'the
Numbers'. As Adric and the Monitor moved slowly away down the hall, Tegan hung
back in the doorway, appalled by the sight of al those earnest, joyless faces.

The Monitor moved from work-station to work-station, looking over each
shoulder and listening in. Behind him trailed Adric, reading aloud from the print-out.
'Zero-A, Zero-four, Zero-Zero, nine-two, two-C, eight-seven . . .'

They had turned a corner and passed through a doorway to enter a second similar
room. Adric was barely conscious of his surroundings; it took all his concentration
to read accurately from the paper in his hand. The Monitor's progress was slow and
deliberate; only once did he hold up his hand to interrupt Adric's flow as he leaned
over a fellow Logopolitan to exchange a few whispered words.

He returned to Adric shaking his head. 'I'm sorry, I thought we had found
something. It's somewhere in this sub-routine . . . somewhere.' He paused to look
up and down the room, and Adric took the opportunity to survey the perspective of
hundreds of whispering workers hunched before their consoles.

'But Monitor, why do you need so many people? I still don't understand why all
this can't be done with machinery?'



'For many uses machinery is unsurpassed. But Logopolis is not interested in
those uses. Block transfer computations cannot be run on computers.'

'Why not?' the boy asked.

'Our manipulations of numbers directly change the physical world. There is no
other maths like ours.'

Adric was surprised by the weight of sorrow in the man's voice. If he hadn't
wanted so eagerly to know more, Adric might have had the tact to stop pressing his
questions.

'You mean the computations themselves would affect a computer?'

'Change its nature and cause it to malfunction,' the Monitor confirmed. 'Only the
living brain is immune.'

'But you have a computer out there. You were using it.'

'To record the code, and prepare new algorithms, yes. But we must never run
our programs on it.'

Adric scanned the print-out in his hand with new respect, and the Monitor,
seeming to take this as an indication that they had rested enough, said 'Perhaps we
can continue . .

.?'

Adric felt a surge of panic. In the process of resting his eyes from the hard black
print he had completely lost his place among all those figures that, he had to confess,
meant nothing to him.

The Monitor must have realised Adric's predicament. Gently, without having to
consult the print-out, he said, 'We had reached zero-seven, zero-four, A-zero, three-
zero, three-eight. We should be somewhere towards the end of the third block.'

The silver-haired Logopolitan was smiling at him. Adric's pulse slowed, and he
found his place again. Together they moved on down the long row of seated workers.

The Doctor stirred and tried to lift his head. Even in his coma, immobile within
the black winding-sheet of unconsciousness, the persistent sound, screwed up now to
the pitch of pain, had somehow penetrated his awareness. Some fierce red luminosity
swam in the darkness behind his eyes; it sapped the strength from his neck, and his
head sank once more onto the TARDIS floor.

If he had been able to open his eyes he might have seen, imaged on the viewer
screen, the Logopolitan devices Nyssa had identified as loudspeakers. From the
distorted perspective they seemed like giant steel-gauze hands cupped protectively



around the tiny time machine. The gauze vibrated slightly as the energy pulsed
through it.

The deadly buzzing began to fade. Quite suddenly it stopped altogether. In the
silence that fell like soft snow, the Doctor opened his eyes.

There had been nothing out of place in the Registers, the Monitor was sure of
that. The secret was out here in the deep and winding streets, alive with whispers and
the click of abacus beads. But there were far too many of them. They could never
check them all in time.

Still reading from the print-out, though noticeably flagging now, Adric walked
close beside the Monitor. He had become almost hypnotised by his own incantations.
'Eight-three, zero-three, A-three, three-seven, two-B, two-B, three-F, zero-D...' The
paragraph of figures came to a conclusion in one more restful island of white space
on the page before his eyes. 'That's the end of the third block', he told the Monitor.

TheMonitor was turning from side to side as they walked, glancing at the bowed,
seated figures and the abacuses in the entrances that lined the street. He dipped his
head to Adric in acknowledgement and said 'The work is wearying to those unused
to it, but we must continue.'

Adric took a deep breath and began again. 'Fourth block begins... Zero-three,
zero-two, zero-zero, F-eight...'

'Zero-zero, E-eight, I think,' the Monitor corrected, without interrupting his
surveillance.

TheMonitor was right; Adric had misread the figure. 'Sorry, E-eight,' said Adric,
wondering at the precision of detail held in that smooth grey head. 'It is difficult, I
know,'

said the Monitor, putting his hand on Adric's shoulder. 'But accuracy is of vital
importance...'

Meanwhile in the Central Register a small group of the Logopolitans that Tegan
had noticed conferring with the Monitor earlier were setting up a pair of large flat
devices on either side of the TARDIS. They looked a little like portable screens.

'Some sort of sonic projectors,' Nyssa suggested, raising her soft, clear voice a
little over the sea-shell sound of myriad whispers that washed into the room from the
Registers beyond the doors.

Tegan was puzzled. 'What's the good of that?'

'They must be creating a temporary zone of stasis around the TARDIS. But I'm
afraid I don't understand their science.'



'That goes double forme,' said Tegan. The Logopolitans hadwaved them politely
back from the TARDISwhile they set up their screens. NowTeganwas steeringNyssa
towards one of the doors. 'But one thing's clear as daylight. Come and take a peek
in this room here...'

She pointed through the doorway to the External Register, and for the first time
Nyssa saw the source of the echoing whispers. 'They all seem very dedicated,' she
said, watching them.

'Dedicated! That's one way of looking at it. You know what I think? I think it's
sheer exploitation. Just look at their faces.'

'They certainly all seem very serious,' Nyssa agreed. 'But I've seen that look on
my father's face - intense dedication. These people are scientists. They're trying to
help the Doctor.'

'If you askme theymust be under some huge threat to keep them so hard at work,'
Tegan said. 'Not that it seems to be doing the Doctor any good.' The two girls

were walking back to where a knot of Logopolitans were gathering around the
TARDIS. Some of the group stepped politely aside as the girls approached.

Nyssa stopped in front of the TARDIS, measuring it with her eye.

Tegan had noticed the same thing. There was no doubt about it: the TARDIS
had stopped shrinking.

Adric's throat was very dry now, and he spoke with obvious effort. '...eight-nine,
nine-A, zero-A, one-one, E-seven...'

Once again the Monitor stopped him. It was the fourth time in the past three
streets.

Adric was becoming an unreliable reader. 'E-nine,' the Monitor corrected, a little
testily.

Adric stared at the paper in front of him. The little black figures were starting to
dance in front of his eyes. 'Sorry,' the boy said. 'E-nine, three-three...' But he broke
off almost immediately. 'Did you say "E-nine"? It says E-seven here.'

TheMonitor seized the paper. 'You're right, E-seven. And the next three numbers
are wrong...' He looked rapidly up and down the street, calculating the shortest route.
'Come on, this way.'

Tegan's elation at finding that the shrinking process had come to a halt was
quickly replaced by a renewed sense of despair. 'The TARDIS isn't much use to
anybody that size, stable or not,' she said to Nyssa who was kneeling beside her. If
only one could see in through those small black windows.



'Perhaps it gives us some time,' said Nyssa, after a moment.

'Time to do what? We don't even know if he's alive in there.'

But the Doctor was alive. After his ordeal the very idea astonished him, but, as
he sat up, holding his head in his hands, the suspicion shaped itself into a theory which
hardened into a fact. Yes, he was alive!

The moment he saw the Logopolitan devices magnified in the viewer screen
he realised what had happened. 'They've arrested the dimension spiral. Things are
looking up.'

The street seemed narrower than the others, and the sounds quieter. The Monitor
stopped at the junction to make sure of his bearings.

'This is the street. The error should be somewhere here...'

They advanced side by side, just as they had in so many streets before. But now
the Monitor moved more slowly, like a cat that can smell its prey.

The first two cells on the left-hand side of the street were occupied by chanting
Logopolitans, busy at their abacuses. But the third cell stood empty.

Adric noticed it first. The shrunken body lay carelessly beside the vacant stool
like a neglected child's toy. There was a faint, fresh smell, like ozone, in the air.

The next two cel s revealed the same gruesome story. Horrified, the Monitor
looked up from the tiny body he had knelt beside. 'Sabotage,' he said darkly.

'Murder,' corrected Adric. 'That's far worse.'

The Monitor stood up, and his voice was low and harsh. 'Interference with the
workings of Logopolis. That could be the most dangerous crime in the universe.'

At the time it struck Adric as odd that the Monitor should raise his eyes as he
spoke, looking not along the length of the street, but fixing his gaze quite definitely
on one particular point in the sky.

What the Monitor was looking at Adric was soon to discover. But the boy
recognised at once the shadow of terror that lurked beneath the surface of those leaden
eyes.



8

Adric looked up and down the street, alert for any sign of the being he had come
to hate so much, and all the time trying to keep his gaze from drifting back, as it kept
doing in fascinated horror, to the tiny corpses of what had once been Logopolitans.
The Monitor meanwhile had picked up one of the abacuses and was rattling off some
rapid calculations, pausing occasionally to make emendations to the print-out.

And if he had seen the Master? Adric wondered what he would have done, and
realised how much he had come to depend on the Doctor's wisdom. Without him it
was hard to reach a decision - a state of mind he was certain the Doctor would not
condone. Adric vowed then and there to make it his mission to find the Master.

Almost as if he had conjured up the image from his mind, a figure appeared at
the far end of the street. It was standing on the terrace of pink rock above the dwelling
places, and was clearly no Logopolitan. Instead of the flowing dark robes, it wore -
or rather, was imbued in the aura of – a white, shimmering translucence that seemed
to fade even as Adric looked. It was the figure the Doctor had negotiated with on the
bridge!

The Monitor had been too involved in his own work at the abacus to see any
of this.

Now he got up briskly, rolling up the print-out. The movement distracted Adric's
gaze for a fraction of a second, and when he looked again there was nothing where
the watching figure had stood but rocks and the shadows of rocks.

'Quickly!' said the Monitor. 'We must return to the Central Register at once.'

At least the hideous buzzing had stopped and the console room now looked its
old self again. But the exaggerated gravity that slowed down his movements, and the
giant faces of Nyssa and Tegan in the frame of the viewer screen were enough to
remind the Doctor that he and the TARDIS were still literally in a tight squeeze.

If the error was in the dimensioning routine there was a remote possibility of
being able to dematerialise by shorting out the chameleon circuit altogether. It was
a dangerous business, but it was something to do! Struggling against gravity as he
moved towards the console, the Doctor tried to draw together in his mind the remnants
of his knowledge of timemap structuring. Romana's help would be useful, he thought.
Or come to that, anybody's.

He went to work, overlooked by the girls' huge unseeing faces. Grounding the
chameleon circuit was a massive task - the whole Real World gearing would have
to be unharnessed before he could get to the necessary components - and the result
was risky at best, and at worst unthinkable. In the heart of his two hearts the Doctor
must have realised that the only real chance of help was from outside. Yet a streak of
stubbornness was driving him to a course that might only add to the danger. Wielding
the sonic screwdriver he began to remove the first panel of the console.



The screen-like objects on either side of the miniature TARDIS were emitting a
faint hum, Tegan realised after she had been kneeling beside them for a while. Nyssa
had explained that they were probably sending out some sort of cancellation wave to
hold the effects of the scrambled dimensioning in check.

And a lot of use that was. Tegan looked in despair at the tiny vehicle that had
spirited her to this strange and remote place. It had already caused her such distress
that she didn't care if she never saw it again. Except that it was her only way back
to civilisation.

And the Doctor was in it. Adric broke into her thoughts, rushing in through the
door with the Monitor. 'The Monitor's done it,' the boy exclaimed as Nyssa and Tegan
scrambled to their feet. 'He's found the error.'

TheMonitor quickly explained asmuch aswas necessary. The error was in Block
Four of the dimensioning routine, and somehow the correct figures had to be got to
the Doctor so that he could re-enter them into the console.

'Assuming he's alive in there,' said Tegan, taking the amended print-out from
the Monitor.

It was her idea to hold up the printed sheet towards the TARDIS, in the hope that
the Doctor would be able to read it on the Viewer Screen. 'Let's just hope he knows
what to do,' she added. Adric helped her unroll the print-out. 'Hewill. He's the Doctor!'

And his own words reminded him of his vow to track down the Master. How
long they would have to wait until the Doctor was out of the TARDIS, or what state
he would be in when he finally emerged, were unknown quantities. Meanwhile the
evil Time Lord was somewhere near, stalking the Logopolitan streets. Adric jumped
up. 'I've got to go back,'

he said. 'The Master . . . he's out there.'

Nyssa caught hold of his arm. 'TheMaster? I'm comingwith you.' Nothing would
put Nyssa off. 'I came here to find the Master I must know what's happened to my
father.'

Adric saw the determination in those serious olive-green eyes. He took her hand,
and, with a wave to Tegan and theMonitor, they ran down the stairs towards the street.

Up until that moment the Doctor had been sitting under the console, studying
one of the small components littering the floor around his feet, a collection of multi-
coloured objects that might have been mistaken for infants' toys.

It was no pleasure disassembling the Real World gearing. There are some things
in life, the Doctor thought to himself, that shouldn't be tampered with - and the
TARDIS was certainly one of them. She was so temperamental that it was almost
impossible to isolate a fault without generating a number of others.



Then he reminded himself that it was because of the TARDIS he had come to
Logopolis. Funny, that. You put up with its tantrums through the centuries, and then
a sort of vanity drives you to try and improve the old vehicle. To tamper, in fact. But
in that he had been out-tampered by the Master.

'The cheese-board is the world, and the pieces,' the Doctor said aloud as he began
to dislodge the next component in the chain, 'are the phenomena of the universe.
As my old friend Huxley used to say.' Or was it chess-board? Yes, chess-board, of
course . . .

And then he remembered with a chill the rest of what Huxley had said. He had
been speaking of the battle of science to wrest knowledge from that stubborn
opponent, the Nature of Things. But the words might quite as well have applied to the
Master. 'The opponent never overlooks a mistake, or makes the smallest allowance
for ignorance.'

Ignorance was the word. There was no denying it: he was an ignorant old Doctor,
and he had made a mistake.

He lifted his eyes again to the viewer screen, but the earnest young faces were
gone now, he noticed with some disappointment. Now the Logopolitans were
blocking the viewer with a sheet of paper coveredwith numbers. His head had actually
ducked back under the console before he realised. Numbers! He jumped up again -
or rather tried to.

If the exaggerated gravity hadn't slowed the movement he would certainly have
cracked his head on the under-side of the console.

Magnified on the screen, theMonitor's precisely hand-written emendations stood
out clearly against the machine print. Very pleased with life, the Doctor reached for
the data block.

'The mark of the Master,' said Adric with a shudder, pointing out to Nyssa the
doll-like, dead Logopolitans. He hadmanaged to trace his way back to the street where
the Monitor's search had wound to its ugly conclusion. 'He must have added his own
voice to the Numbers, and corrupted the Doctor's code,' said Nyssa, the anger flashing
in her eyes. Adric remembered that this was the man who had almost destroyed her
planet, and who was almost certainly responsible for her father's disappearance -
though in what way the Doctor hadn't explained.

Adric pointed out the spot where he had seen the translucent figure that seemed
to have followed them from the planet Earth.

'TheMaster?' Nyssa asked. Neither of them, they realised, knew what theMaster
looked like.

'Him . . . or something worse.'

They had begun to explore beyond the end of the street, where a T-junction lead
off out of sight in both directions. The susurration and clack of beads came more
strongly from their left, so Adric presumed that way lead back to the centre.



For some reason they both had an instinct to explore to the right. It was nearly
the undoing of both of them.

The trouble was, there was noway of knowing if the Doctor could see the figures,
and if he could, whether he was in a position to do anything about it. Her aching arms
and the crick in her back told her she had been holding up the print-out quite long
enough, but Tegan had the continuing feeling that if she stayed kneeling in front of
the TARDIS just a little bit longer it might make the difference of life and death to
the Doctor. To say nothing of whether she ever got home or not.

The Monitor arranged a compromise. But having instructed two Logopolitans to
hold up the sheet of paper while Tegan stretched her legs, the last thing the Monitor
expected was to find himself being marched by this imperious young woman over to
the door that lead through to the External Register.

'Would you mind explaining something to me?' she demanded, indicating the
long row of earnest, pallid faces seated before the consoles. 'Back home in Brisbane
we'd cal a place like that a sweat-shop. What's going on?'

TheMonitor seemed not to understand. Tegan explained the phrase 'sweat-shop',
and went on: 'You're not going to tel me they're all working of their own free will.'

'Academic research', said the Monitor, 'commands its own dedication.'

'You can't tel me this is just academic research. Look at them - they're grey with
worry.'

'And what about you, Tegan - are you dedicated to your work?'

Tegan admitted she was top of the training course for the airline job. But that
was different. 'We all enjoyed it. These people are being forced into - whatever they're
up to.

They don't smile, they don't talk.'

The Monitor spread his hands in a careful gesture of incomprehension. 'Their
language is the language of the Numbers. It is their talent and their passion, and their
work is very serious. They have no need to smile.' Tegan was aghast. 'No need to
smile!'

Touching her arm, the Monitor steered her gently back into the Central Register.
'And as for speech,' he continued, closing the door behind them, 'we are a people
driven not by individual need, but by mathematical necessity. The language of the
Numbers is as much as we need.'

'But if they can't talk at all . . .' Tegan broke off, looking in the direction of the
TARDIS. It was fluorescing again. In panic she ran to it, snatching the paper from
the Logopolitans.



She was about to turn on them for neglecting their job, when theMonitor stepped
in.

'The Doctor's reversed it,' he said, delight brightening his parchment face.

It was true! The TARDIS was growing larger as they watched.

It was a street with few cells, on the very edge of the city where the whispers
were quieter. Adric and Nyssa were running; for Adric had been almost certain he
had seen the translucent figure again.

Nyssa's hair coiled in the wind as she ran beside him. 'Where?'

'Never mind - follow me,' said Adric, racing ahead.

She was about to comply when the hem of her skirt caught in one of the small
thorny plants that grew along the pink rock wall. She paused to lean against a nearby
pillar and unhook herself. The tiny tenacious barbs were reluctant to let go, and she
had to sit on the base of the pillar, which was decorated with a frieze of carved leaves,
and lean back against its squat, fluted column while she picked the thorns out of her
skirt.

When she looked up, Adric had turned the corner - in which direction she couldn't
be sure. Rising to follow, she became aware of a pair of eyes watching her from the
gloom of the cell. The eyes were familiar. She raised her hand to shade out the light
and peered into the shadows.

'Father?' She held her breath.

The figure in the shadows stepped forwards, and Nyssa was overjoyed at what
she saw.

'Nyssa! Nyssa, my dear,' said the Master, holding out his hands to her.

He seemed changed; younger than she remembered him, his silver hair now dark
and his face leaner. But Nyssa could never mistake her father's voice. They walked
through the narrowing streets until they came to the gullies that led out onto the
plateau, and all the while she listened to that low voice as it unfolded new ideas for
research, plans for the future and stories of past deeds. She realised as they stopped
to look out over the distant rosy rolling hills that she had been so caught up in the
joy of seeing him again and hearing that dark hypnotic voice that she had scarcely
taken in a word.

'What is this "mission" of yours, father?' She reached out to touch his hand, and
was surprised to find it icy. 'Tell me. You seem so changed by it, so cold, somehow.'

'Logopolis is a cold place. A cold, high place overlooking the universe. It holds
a single great secret, Nyssa. Which you and I will discover together.'



'And the Doctor,' she added. 'The Doctor can help us.'

'Oh yes, the Doctor can certainly help us.' He smiled a thin smile. Then he
withdrew his hand and said suddenly, 'You must return to him.'

'I don't want to be parted from you, father.'

'No need to be.' There was a chuckle in the voice of the man beside her and
from his coat he brought out an armlet. Chased into the gold was a design of leaves
sprouting in pairs along a stem studded with small bright stones. He clipped it on her
upper arm. It seemed to catch at her flesh, making her wince momentarily with pain.
'This will keep us in mind of each other,' he said. And then he was gone, leaving her
to wander back to the city alone.

At last the TARDIS was full-size again! It fluoresced briefly for the last time,
and then the door opened and the Doctor stepped out.

'Monitor, I can't thank you enough.'

'Tegan, too,' said the Monitor. 'But please, Doctor. There's really no need . . .'

The Doctor enthusiastically shook the Monitor and Tegan by the hands
nevertheless.

'No, you two have saved my life. There have been quite enough deaths already.'

The Monitor was surprised. 'You know about the deaths?'

The Doctor was distressed to learn from the Monitor about the Logopolitan lives
that had been lost. But he had been referring to Earth, intending to lead up to
something that had to be said. He took the young woman's arm.

'Tegan, your Aunt Vanessa . . .' he began.

'Yes, how do you like that? She's probably back at the cottage by now, with
tea and crumpets, while I . . .' She broke off, catching sight of the Doctor's grave
expression.

'She's all right, isn't she, Doctor?'

The Doctor told her the news as simply as he could. Tears wel ed up in her deep
brown eyes. 'That dear, sweet lady...'

They were standing by the window, looking out over the myriad streets carved
into the Logopolitan rock. The Doctor fumbled in his pockets for the cleanest
handkerchief he could find, and said, 'That's why I'm going to put a stop to the Master
if it's the last thing I do.'

Tegan blew her nose. The Doctor turned from the window and, looking round
the big white room, said, 'There were one or two more of us. Where is everybody?'



'Your companions went to hunt for this person called the Master,' the Monitor
explained.

'Idiots! Adric should know better by now.'

The Doctor's explosion of anger brought Tegan back to something of her old
form. 'He was only trying to help. He saw somebody out there.'

The Doctor swept the common-sense response aside and, telling them to stay in
the Central Register, and to be very, very careful, ran from the room. Tegan followed
him to the door and watched him sprint down the sweep of carved stone steps that
lead to the street.

Adric had turned the corner and run the whole length of the second street before
realising Nyssa wasn't with him. When he reached the spot where he had last seen her
he called her name again. No responding voice disturbed the distant whispers.

Adric searched like this for what seemed hours. When he finally found her,
wandering in a daze quite close to where they had parted, she seemed oblivious of
the time that had passed.

'Did you find him?' was all she asked.

Adric shook his head. 'We'd better get back to the Doctor.' After they had walked
through several streets, during which time Nyssa had only answered in monosyllables
his attempts to talk to her, he stopped and said, 'Nyssa? Are you all right?'

A faint smile lit up her small round face. 'My father's here.'

'Your father? So you found him!' Adric exclaimed.

Nyssa seemed to hesitate. 'Yes . . . it was my father.'

'But that's wonderful. What's he doing here on Logopolis?'

She had been sworn to secrecy, so she said nothing of the 'mission'. But she did
show Adric the armlet. 'It's too small for me. I've been trying to get it off . . .'

It was certainly pinching into her forearm. But when Adric inspected it he was
surprised to discover that the precious stones inlaid into the chased gold were
electronically illuminated from inside. 'It's a sort of . . . communications device. Yes,
it does look tight .

. .’

Tugging at it may have disturbed a loose connection, because it sparked
suddenly.

Adric jumped back, feeling a powerful electric shock. He recovered almost
immediately, and was surprised to find that Nyssa had felt nothing.

All she said was, 'I hope you haven't broken it.'



He tried a second time to remove it. There was just enough room to get one of his
thumbs under it, and he was experimenting with the best way of gripping it with the
other hand when he noticed Nyssa's arm begin to flex in a curious mechanical way.
The hand opened and with clinical precision began to advance towards his neck.

'Hey, what are you doing? I'm trying to concentrate,' Adric laughed.

The hand was closing on his throat. Adric was surprised at the strength in those
small fingers, but the most extraordinary thing of all was that Nyssa herself seemed
not to notice anything at all. Her face was averted, entranced while the steel grip bit
tighter into his neck.

And then he heard a voice he had thought he might never hear again.

'Adric! Nyssa!'

The Doctor was striding down the street towards them. The fingers around
Adric's throat instantly relaxed, and Nyssa cried out with delight, 'Doctor! You're
free!'



9

Adric's delight at seeing the Doctor again was tempered by a feeling of guilt at
having abandoned him to the perilous instability of the TARDIS to go off hunting
for the Master with Nyssa. The Doctor left them in no doubt that they were lucky to
have survived the folly; and then as they hurried back to the Central Register, seemed
prepared to drop the subject. There was one thing he wanted to clear up, though.
'Tegan says you saw him.'

'Yes, here, in one of these streets,' said Adric.

'What did he look like?' the Doctor asked innocently.

Adric was confused. He had only once seen the Master, on Traken in his guise
as the Melkur. And yet he knew by instinct. 'You know. The man you were talking
to on the bridge . . .'

'The man on the bridge?' repeated the Doctor.

'Yes . . .' The boy hesitated, thrown by the Doctor's tone of irritation. Then it
happened again - as if just thinking of that vaguely outlined watching figure were
enough to conjure him up! Adric was sure he wasn't seeing things. The figure was at
ground level this time, standing still and translucent at the far end of the street. The
boy pointed.

'There, that's him.'

Adric thought he heard Nyssa gasp, but turned to find her laughing. 'That can't
be the Master . . .' she said. 'That's the man who brought me here from Traken. A
friend of yours, Doctor.'

Adric was astonished, but the Doctor confirmed her story with an uneasy nod.
'Yes, a sort of . . . passing acquaintance. He brought you here on my account.'

Adric still felt some dread at meeting this creature whose presence he had once
felt sure even theDoctor feared. But as they approached, some cloudmust have shifted
overhead, because a shaft of sunlight hit the spot where the figure had been standing.

The gleam thrown back from the pink rock momentarily dazzled Adric. He
blinked his eyes, and when he looked again . . . 'Doctor, he's gone!'

Oddly the Doctor didn't seem surprised.

Who was this dreamlike figure who seemed to be hovering on the edge of their
existence? As they pressed on towards the Central Register Adric pursued the subject.

'I was almost sure it was the Master.'

'I warned you against unnecessary guesswork,' snapped the Doctor.

'But he was the man who told you bad luck was on the way.'



'He was right,' said the Doctor. 'And worse to come.'

Worse! Why was the Doctor so sure?

'And you believe him?' the boy persisted. 'Why?'

'Because he is here,' said the Doctor, his eyes fixed on the route ahead. Like so
much that the Doctor said it seemed to make no sense. It would have puzzled Adric
more if he had known that on this occasion the Doctor was speaking no more than
the exact and literal truth.

It still didn't seem right to Tegan. She watched the serious faces of the two
Logopolitans who had come to collect the stabilising screens around the TARDIS,
and, while they silently wheeled them through into one of the External Registers,
wondered if there would ever be any - well, fun – on Logopolis?

The Monitor tried to tell her of the invisible joy that comes from selfless
dedication, but she couldn't understand it. In a way it was presumptuous of her to try;
Logopolis was a completely different civilisation from anything she was used to. And
yet Tegan still had this feeling that the Monitor was concealing something.

The two Logopolitans rounded a corner and wheeled the pair of screens through
into the second External Register. Of the long row of Numberers busy chanting into
the apertures, only one turned from his work to watch them pass. He wore the dark
flowing robe of a Logopolitan, but he lacked the pale complexion, and his face was
brightly animated above his sharp black beard. With the faintest chuckle the Master
rose and followed the two screens.

The door to the Technology Store opened to admit the screen-bearers. But before
they could pass through, a discreet flash and short sizzling sound halted the screens
in the doorway.

Nothing had happened to distract the busy Numberers. Had they looked up they
would have seen one of the two screens turn in the doorway to face the way it had
come, manoeuvred by a single figure in dark flowing Logopolitan robes. A faintly
sweet smell of ozone hung in the air. The two screen-bearers lay in the doorway, their
corpses shrunken to the size of dolls.

The Master took a small silver box from the folds of his robes and attached it to
the rim of the screen. A change came over the long hall: all sound drained from the
scene, and then one by one the Numberers froze into immobility. All that penetrated
the deadly silence was a tiny chuckle of triumph.

Beneath her aggressive exterior, which the Monitor assumed was due to feelings
of insecurity in the alien surroundings, Teganwas clearly an intelligent youngwoman.



But he judged hers to be a mind not drawn to abstractions: the objects of her thought
were concrete.

This presented a difficulty in the way of conversation while they waited for the
Doctor to bring back Adric and Nyssa. The Logopolitan world was predominantly a
world of thought; such solid furnishing as lay about the place were incidental to the
life of the City. By way of compromise they settled upon a discussion of the screens,
items of solid technology that had certainly proved useful.

The Monitor heard the door behind them open. As if by way of illustration, one
of the screens they had been discussing appeared there. He moved towards it, about
to question its return. The man dressed as a Logopolitan was clearly an alien. The
Monitor halted in his tracks; the newcomer radiated evil.

'Please remain where you are,' said the Master. 'I have it in my power to bring
Logopolis to a complete halt.'

And Tegan's blood froze to hear again the chuckle that had first terrified her in
the TARDIS cloister room.

They were still some way away from the Central Register when Nyssa stopped
suddenly. 'Listen!'

'I can't hear anything,' said Adric. And then he realised. Logopolis, the city that
buzzed with numbers and the clacking of abacus beads . . . was now completely silent.

'Logopolis has stopped!' Nyssa exclaimed.

The Doctor peered into the nearest cel . As they had come to expect, a
Logopolitan was sitting in his customary place at the entrance. But this one was
completely motionless and silent, his abacus lying unused on his lap.

Adric saw the Doctor reach out to touch the still figure. To his horror the flesh
crumbled away to dust as if it were a hollow, fragile shell.

The Doctor straightened up. 'It's started already,' he said grimly. 'The Master's
attack. I was vain enough to believe it was me he was after. Logopolis is his target.'

There was nothing Tegan or the Monitor could do. The screen, with the Master's
added silver device, was pointing into the aperture of the Monitor's console, pouring
its lethal silence into the whole city.

The Monitor's distress was evident in his voice. 'Turn that machine off
immediately. You fool! You have no idea what you are doing.'

The Master smiled. 'Merely emitting a sound-cancelling wave. Logopolis is now
temporarily suspended, Monitor. The silence gives us an opportunity to discuss its
future.'



'No!' The monosyllable was full of pain. 'It won't have a future, and nor will
anything else unless you stop now.' The Monitor was pleading. 'You are eroding the
structure and generating entropy.'

Tegan had no ideawhat was happening, but she could see from theMonitor's face
that something had gone horribly wrong - something the Master had not anticipated.

'An absurd assertion, Monitor,' said the Master, with an arrogant curl of his lip.
'I know the power of this device down to the last decibel.'

'But you don't know Logopolis!'

The Master stared back with cold, empty eyes. 'But I shal know it, shan't I,
Monitor?

Before I allow the fascinating sounds of life here to resume you will have told
me all there is to know. Of the secret work you are doing here perhaps . . . I heard
rumours of your plagiarism of the Earthling's fruitless Pharos Project. Why have you
created a copy here on Logopolis, Monitor? The time has come for you to share your
secret with me.'

There was madness in the smooth control ed voice that made the Monitor move
back instinctively, shaking his head. 'I cannot tell you. No one must know.

That has been our firm decision.'

So the Monitor had been concealing something! The thought flashed through
Tegan's mind as she heard the Master say: 'Then we will wait until you change your
decision.

Patience is a particular virtue of mine.'

'If you call killing the Logopolitans a virtue.' Tegan turned at the sound of the
familiar voice. His scarf and coat flying, the Doctor strode into the room, followed
by Adric and Nyssa.

The Master's laughter fell like a shower of acid rain on the white-walled room.
'Killing them, Doctor? You expect me to believe that?'

The Doctor certainly did. In a few terse sentences he gave an account of what
they had seen in the street outside, and added, 'So you see, theMonitor's right, Master.
Your spirit of free enterprise is more damaging than even you can imagine.'

'Father! What are you doing?'

There was a note of surprise in Nyssa's voice. She had been slowly walking
towards the Master, and now she stood before him, reaching out, her round face a
question.



'That's not your father, Nyssa.' The Doctor gently took her arm and drew her
back.

'Tremas is dead. Killed by the Master here!'

'Dead!' She saw the truth in the Doctor's eyes, and turned to confront the object
of his accusing finger. 'You've killed my father!'

Again the Master's laugh grated on the still air. 'But his body remains useful.'

Adric was astonished to see this small, aristocratic girl so brimming with icy
anger. She tore herself from the Doctor's grasp and rushed at the Master. But as she
was almost upon him a curious thing happened. The arm on which she wore her new
gold armlet seemed suddenly to be suspended in the air, pulled up by some invisible
hook. It jerked Nyssa back: she tugged at it, trying to reach the Master with the other
hand. But the mocking face lay just beyond her flailing fingers.

'I'm grateful to Tremas,' the Master sneered. 'Without this body I could not have
conquered Logopolis.'

'This isn't conquest - it's devastation,' the Doctor shouted.

'Yes, you will destroy everything.'

It must have been the note of terrible urgency in the Monitor's voice that made
the Master hesitate fractionally before he said, 'You exaggerate, Monitor. Logopolis
is not the universe.'

'But it is! Logopolis is the keystone.' The Monitor's face was ashen. 'If you
destroy Logopolis, you unravel the whole causal nexus!'

'Causal nexus! You insult my intelligence, Monitor.' But the Master was less
sure now.

He paused before the Monitor, glowering into those opaque grey eyes, trying to
read the purpose behind this preposterous suggestion.

In the silence Tegan whispered to Adric, 'What's he talking about?'

'Something's interfering with the law of cause and effect,' the boy replied. His
gaze was fixed on the Master, who seemed about to strike the Monitor. Out of the
corner of his eye he saw the Doctor rush forward.

'Listen to him! The Monitor's right! We've seen it!'

'Please step back, Doctor. Or . . .' The Master touched a button on the silver box
attached to the screen. Nyssa cried out in pain as her arm swung round threateningly
towards the Doctor.

'Let her go,' said the Doctor between gritted teeth. But for safety's sake he took
a step back.



Adric was rasher than the Doctor. His anger drove any thought of the
consequences out of his mind, and he dived for the screen, sending it flying across the
room. At that moment a hand closed around his throat. 'Nyssa! Let go.' Once again
the small fingers dug deep into his neck. He screwed his head round to see blank
astonishment in her eyes.

'I . . . can't . . .' she cried.

TheMaster voicewas cool. 'That is a demonstration of the causal nexus,Monitor.
The electro-muscular constrictor gives me complete control over that hand. Please
replace the screen, Doctor. Or one of your young friends will eliminate the other.'

The Doctor had no choice. Seeing him forced to do as the Master demanded,
Tegan's anger boiled over. 'You revolting man. I wouldn't take orders from you if you
were the last man in the universe.'

'Which he may well be, if he carries on like this,' said the Doctor when the screen
was in place again. 'Don't you see what the Monitor is telling us, Master? Logopolis
isn't the academic backwater it seems, but somehow crucial to the structure of
creation.'

'I have never been susceptible to argument based on abstract nouns, Doctor.' The
Master touched the silver box and Nyssa released her grip.

The Doctor pointed to the door. 'Then come out into the streets and see what's
happening.'

His adversary stroked his beard with a gloved hand, considering the idea for a
moment.

Then he shook his head. 'No need for that, Doctor. I can demonstrate the
continued functioning of Logopolis from here.' He reached towards the silver box.
'This device only creates temporary silence. And can be switched off.'

The Master unclipped the box from the screen, and after a moment put his ear
to the aperture in front of the console to listen.

The Monitor had said nothing for a while. Now his voice was quiet and clear,
with only a hint of a tremble. 'You will hear nothing. Local disruption of structure is
already irreversible. Logopolis is dead.'

The Master hesitated on the steps of the Central Register. Below him the street
was beginning to silt up with a fine pink sand that cascaded down from the shifting
rocks.

Apart from the cracking and hissing of this motion, there was total silence.

He ran down the steps, followed by the others. While the Master inspected cell
after cel , ducking the intermittent showers of debris, the Monitor said softly in the



Doctor's ear. 'We knew there was this danger. We often speculated on what it might
be like.'

TheMaster clutched at an abandoned abacus; it crumbled in his hands. He turned
to the Monitor. 'You've done this deliberately. A ploy to deprive me of my prize.' As
he spoke a nearby cell collapsed in a slide of rubble.

'Don't raise your voice,' the Monitor warned. 'Nothing is solid now. Entropy has
taken over.'

The Master looked wildly round the street, as if trying to escape the truth of the
Monitor's story.

Tegan, who understood very little of this, tugged at Adric's arm. 'But what's he
done?'

Everything had begun to waste away when the Master interfered. That much
Adric was able to explain. 'The Numbers. Somehow they were holding the whole
structure together.'

'The causal nexus broken? I don't believe it.' The note of defiance in the Master's
voice was distinctly unconvincing now. But he went on: 'No, Monitor . . . this is some
crude defence mechanism, a device to delude an enemy. Come, Nyssa, we'll wring
the truth out of them.

He punched a button on the silver box, drawing Nyssa towards him. But when,
with a second button, he tried to elevate her arm . . . nothing happened! He stabbed
at the box with an angry finger. 'It's not working! What have you done, Doctor?'

The Doctor stared him out. 'Not me, Master - you! The entropy you released is
eroding your systems too.'

'Entropy? Absurd . . . the power is weak . . . some freak interference. Increase
the power.'

'More power will only speed the col apse,' said the Monitor quietly.

The Monitor was right. The ornament on Nyssa's arm suddenly shattered and
crumbled to the ground. The Master stopped dead, staring at the remnants of the
armlet. When he looked up again, it was at the Monitor, who had begun to speak with
slow deliberation.

'The things around us are now nomore than husks of themselves. From this point
the unravelling will spread out until all the universe is reduced to a uniform, levelled
nothingness.'

'So it's true!' the Master cried.



'Don't move. Anybody . . .' The Monitor's voice came as a whisper. Instinctively
they all obeyed. Even theMaster stood in silence, surrounded by the creak and shuffle
of shifting structures. All eyes were on theMonitor as he continued. 'You have already
guessed - our Numbers were holding the Second Law of Thermodynamics at bay. The
universe is a closed system. In any closed system entropy is bound to grow until it fills
everything. The deadly secret, unknown until now beyond the bounds of Logopolis,
is this . . .' The Monitor's voice trembled, and they had to strain to hear his next few
words. 'The fact is, the universe long ago passed the point of total collapse.'

For a moment Adric didn't take it in. The Second Law of Thermodynamics
predicted that any system would eventually end in 'heat death', overwhelmed by the
entropy it had produced. But how could the universe have passed the point?

'We had the means to postpone the time,' the Monitor was saying, as if in reply to
the boy's unspoken question. 'The only way was to dispose of entropy. The universe
was closed, so we opened the system by creating voids into other universes.'

'The Charged VacuumEmboitement!' the Doctor exclaimed. 'We passed through
one of your voids, Monitor.' He glanced at Adric. If it hadn't been for an accidental
encounter with a CVE, the Doctor and his TARDIS would never have wandered into
the small universe where he had met the boy. 'We thought the CVE was a natural
phenomenon.'

'I wish it were,' said the Monitor. 'Then there would be no need for them to be
sustained by the energies of Logopolis.'

Suddenly Tegan understood the inhuman dedication of all those rows and rows
of Logopolitans. So this was what had been driving them on: the fact that they and
they alone were capable of keeping the whole universe going long after it ought to
have ground to a halt.

'But without those energies,' the Monitor continued, 'the Charged Vacuum
Emboitements will be closing now. It depended on our continual endeavours - a
temporary solution while the Advanced Research Unit worked on a more permanent
plan. But nothing will come of that now.'

There was silence for a moment. Then the Master, who had been thinking
furiously said, 'What Research Unit?'

'A team devoted to discovering a stable solution that did not depend on our own
continued efforts. But now the team is destroyed. To think of that work too going to
waste . . .'

'There must be something we can do,' Tegan interrupted loudly. She turned to the
Master and shouted, 'This will teach you to meddle with things you don't understand.'

And then she wished she hadn't. The rocks above their heads, weakened to the
consistency of pink sugar, began to cascade down, thundering into the street. She felt
her arm grabbed, and then they were all running - where, she couldn't see for the dust
and the Doctor's scarf blowing across her face.



They stopped, and she looked back to where they had been standing. The street
was now a flat gully, still filling with silt that hissed down from the mounds of
crumbling rock on either side. 'What did I do?' said Tegan.

'Your loud mouth,' Adric whispered.

'We are beyond recriminations now,' sighed theMonitor. 'Beyond everything . . .'

'Almost everything.' The Doctor's voice was even and controlled. He turned to
the Master. 'I can see only one possible course. As Time Lords you and I have a
special responsibility.'

'No,' the Master replied immediately, as though he had been anticipating the
suggestion. 'I refuse to contact Gallifrey.'

'I'm not very keen on the idea myself. But I was going to suggest we pool our
resources.'

The Master pondered the thought for a moment. 'If we do that there will be no
question of your returning to Gallifrey. Perhaps for ever.'

'I'm happy to leave that problem for the future,' said the Doctor. 'If there is one.'

Nyssa's jaw tightened as the Doctor extended his hand to the Master. But it was
Tegan who spoke first. 'Doctor! What are you doing?'

'How can you!' Nyssa exclaimed. 'The creature who killed my father . . .'

The Master remained still, savouring the moment. Then he raised his own black-
gloved hand and moved towards the Doctor. 'Together, then.'

It was then that the Doctor looked round, very much sensing the hostility of his
companions. He began gently at first: 'I can't choose the company I keep. Not in these
circumstances. In fact I have never chosen my own company.' He pointed at Nyssa,
his voice a little harsher now. 'You contacted me, you begged me to help you find
your father.' Then his eyes shifted to Tegan. 'And you, Tegan, your own curiosity
brought you into this . . .' His tone was positively harsh as he turned to Adric. 'As for
you, boy, what are you? A stowaway!'

Adric realised that the Doctor was doing this to make their separation from him
easier to bear, but it was painful nevertheless to be reminded that he had forced his
company upon the man he so admired. And it was even more painful to see the Doctor
turn his back on his companions and reach out towards the evil black hand of this
being who was his sworn enemy.

'Together,' said the Doctor, looking hard into the Master's face. 'The one last
hope.'



'For all of us,' the Master acknowledged.

Solemnly the two Time Lords shook hands.



10

'Now . . . I want no arguments from any of you. Adric, Tegan and Nyssa . . .
that way!'

The rocks which had once formed high cliffs around them had now crumbled
down to a landscape of gentle undulations; a pink plain lay where the great whispering
City had once stood. Beyond the Doctor's gesturing arm they saw only the distant
outline of the Central Register, surmounted by the wire basket of the antenna, broke
the skyline. But his finger was pointing to a small rectangle some way ahead.

'The TARDIS!' exclaimed Nyssa.

Tegan peered at the distant blue shape. 'It's followed us!'

'But how can it do that,' asked Adric, 'with no one in it?'

'Did I say there was no one in it?' snapped the Doctor.

The two Time Lords stood shoulder to shoulder. The crisp, imperative tone of
the Doctor, and something about the evil certainty of the Master's smile, persuaded
them of the uselessness of pleading to stay. The Doctor was collaborating with the
Master, and there was no place for them now in

his plans.

He waved them off with an irritated flap of his arm. 'My friend will take care
of you.'

The three companions trudged towards the TARDIS, speculating about who this
'friend'

might be. Nyssa guessed it must be the man who had brought her to Logopolis.

She was right. They saw the translucent figure standing at the door, but he had
slipped inside before they were close enough to make out his features. It was not until
much later, when the TARDIS was in flight, that they were to meet him face to face.

With a sense of relief the Doctor watched them enter the TARDIS, aware of the
evil presence at his elbow. At least there was a chance they would be safe. Then he
became aware that the Monitor was nowhere to be seen. 'The fool has deserted us!'

said the Master. 'Doesn't he realise he has no chance of survival without our
help?'

Desertion didn't sound like the Monitor's style at all, the Doctor pointed out. He
had gone somewhere for a purpose.

'Purpose!' exclaimed the Master. 'A word almost without meaning now. If he's
trying to salvage the Research Team's work he may have gone back to the Central
Register.'



The Master shaded his eyes and peered towards the distant building. Parts of it
had been eroded already, but it seemed to be standing stronger than the rocks around
it. It occurred to the Doctor that this might be because of its relative newness. But
there was no telling how long it would last.

Together the Doctor and the Master began to pick their way towards it through
the debris. Occasional small landslips opened up beneath their feet, impeding their
journey, and reminding them of the increasing instability. Soon even this dusty ground
would become unstable. And more was at stake than just Logopolis. Even as they
advanced painfully towards the Central Register, the rot was spreading outwards
through the universe, the Second Law of Thermodynamics unleashed after aeons of
constraint.

'I suggest we collect the Monitor, then get out,' said the Doctor.

'How? In my TARDIS?'

'There's no other way.'

The Master smiled. 'You're presuming a lot, Doctor.'

'Aren't I?' said the Doctor. 'And on so short a friendship.'

By the time the two Time Lords had reached the steps of the Central Register the
TARDIS was parsecs away. But the dematerialisation had not gone quite according to
theDoctor's plans. The light was already flashing, ready for departure fromLogopolis,
when the door suddenly opened and Tegan backed out, her flight bag over her
shoulder.

'Come back!' It was Adric calling from inside. 'None of us wants to leave the
Doctor. But it's best to do as he says.' He appeared at the door, pleading with Tegan.

'Best for him, maybe. It's not personal devotion, I can tell you that. But he's
guaranteed to get me back to London Airport, and I'm going to stick with him to make
sure he keeps his word.' And she set off resolutely back the way they had come.

'Tegan!' But it was no good just calling her name, and he couldn't run after her
and leaveNyssa. The TARDISwas already beginning to chuff andwhirr. Adric closed
the door . . . and the TARDIS was gone.

Tegan found the spot where the Doctor and the Master had been standing, but
the only sign of them was a set of vague footprints. At first it seemed an easy track
for someone brought up in the outback to follow, but small potholes kept appearing,
and the wind blew streaming veils of dust across the ground, obscuring the horizon.

She was entering what once must have been the middle of the City, if what
remained of the dwellings was anything to go by. The ruins were taller here: cells
open to the sky, some of them almost complete except for their roofs. The ground was



more solid, but in a way that made it more dangerous. Instead of shifting sand beneath
her feet, great crevasses would occasionally open up just where she was about to step.

Should she have stayed in the TARDIS, she wondered. That was the trouble with
having an independent mind. Tegan consoled herself with the thought that if being
lost and frightened on a rapidly disintegrating planet was good for the moral fibre,
hers must be receiving a tremendous boost.

The Central Register was still recognisable, although portions of the ceiling and
walls had crumbled away, letting in the opalescent light of the Logopolitan sky. The
two Time Lords found the Monitor where they expected, seated at the Earth computer
surrounded by sheets of print-out. Several of the large disk-drive units that surrounded
the console were humming with activity.

The Doctor touched the Monitor's arm. 'The stability is now critical. You must
come with us.'

'For precisely that reason I must stay here, Doctor.'

'What can you do here?' said theMaster. 'You told us Logopolitanmaths wouldn't
run on a computer.'

The Monitor gestured to the print-out strewn across the desk in front of him. 'We
were developing this as the program to take the burden from our own shoulders: a
series of data statements to keep the Charged Vacuum Emboitements open of their
own accord.'

'The Advanced Research Project?' asked the Doctor.

The Monitor nodded. 'The computer holds a complete log of that research.'

The Master snatched at the print-out. Somewhere in all this carefully annotated
mass of numbers there might be a permanent solution to the problem of keeping the
CVEs open. While the Monitor continued his preoccupation with the console, the
Master and the Doctor poured over the document, tracing and retracing the folds of
logic.

Eventually, the Master left the document and went to peer over the Monitor's
shoulder. It had become clear to the Doctor, who paused now to suck the end of his
scarf and think, that although the work of the Research Team was far from complete,
it had certainly been on the right track. The Master felt differently. He returned to
whisper into the Doctor's ear, 'His work is loose, speculative, useless. We cannot wait
for him. We must vacate.'

A creaking sound, emanating from the walls, reminded them that the local
structure would not hold much longer. 'Vacate?' echoed the Doctor. 'Where to? The
col apse will spread out like ripples in a pool throughout the whole of space-time. No,
what we have to do is . . .' He tailed off into silence, somewhat stuck for options.



'Wel , Doctor?'

The Doctor waved his arms vaguely but enthusiastically. 'A positive response.
Something definite, resourceful. Entropy works by rusting the resolve quite as

much as by crushing cities into sand dunes.'

'You have a concrete idea behind all that poetry, Doctor?' sneered the Master.

The Doctor had to admit he hadn't. He put his hands back in his pockets and
returned to his study of the print-out.

'My dear Doctor. You're a poor scientist. It's easy to see why you make so many
mistakes.'

'And why you make so few friends,' the Doctor replied.

The bitter exchange was interrupted by the Monitor rising from the Earth
computer. 'I have done what I can in the time. A desperate last effort. It only remains
to align the antenna and beam the program out to space.' The antenna still held firm
on what remained of the roof. It was a doubtful enterprise; even the Doctor for all his
optimism had to admit that. He was about to follow the Monitor through the narrow
door that lead to the upper storey, when, through a gaping hole in the wall, he saw a
familiar purple uniform in the street below. 'Tegan!' shouted the Doctor.

'Thank heavens you're still here, anyway.' She arrived breathless at the top of the
steps, her uniform dusty and her shoes scuffed.

'Tegan! I told you to get out of here.'

'No thanks, Doc. I'm staying with you. You're the only insurance policy I've got.'

The Doctor dragged her inside, ducking a shower of debris. Above them, through
ever increasing gaps in the ceiling, they could see the Monitor treading warily across
the roof towards the antenna. At one point he stopped to wave to them. 'There is a
CVE close by we might be able to re-open, he called down, pointing to an area of sky.

Tegan held her breath; his progress across the crumbling roof looked suicidal.
'What's he doing?'

The Master snorted by way of answer. 'He can do as he pleases - he's harmless.
But you and I, Doctor, wemust form a plan. I propose . . . one: withdrawal to a position
of temporary security; two: reconfiguration of our two TARDISes into time cone
inverters; three: creating a stable safe zone by applying temporal inversion isometry
to as much of space-time as we can isolate . . .'

Tegan had been unable to take her eyes off the Monitor, and now her scream
interrupted the Master. He and the Doctor turned to look upwards. Another shower of
silt was pouring from the ceiling, caused by loose stonework tumbling from the roof
where the Monitor was flailing, as if trying to retain his balance. And then, as if in
slowmotion, they saw him slip. But the horror of it was that instead of falling heavily,



the figure of the Monitor began to float down through the ceiling towards them, like
some huge flake of ash blown in the smoke of a fire.

The body hit the floor with scarcely a sound, cracked open like a hollow shell,
and powdered away to dust.

Tegan stared at the spot, her hand pressed involuntarily against her mouth.
'Horrible, horrible.' She heard a harsh, dry voice that seemed to speak her thoughts
and looked up to see the Master backing away towards the door.

'Hardly more horrible than turning people into shrunken dol s,' she shouted at
him.

The Master's eyes were wild and staring in his pallid face. 'No! Anything but
that. Do what you like, Doctor. Logopolis is yours!' At the door he turned and ran,
disappearing down the stairs with debris cascading after him.

'Doctor! We must stop him!' She ran to the window overlooking the street. 'The
Master's getting away.

The Doctor had said nothing for a long time. Now he spoke slowly, as if all
sense of urgency had drained from him. 'Which means we can't - as he's got the only
TARDIS

left on Logopolis.'

'Then we've got to get after him.' She ran to the Doctor, but he gestured to her
to let him think for a moment.

'Reconfigure the two TARDISes into time cone inverters,' muttered the Doctor,
pensively echoing the Master's proposal. 'Yes, it would have worked - for at least part
of the universe. What a waste of a brilliant mind.'

A slab of plaster exploded into fragments at Tegan's feet. 'And a waste of two
more brilliant minds if we don't do something soon.'

'You're right. The Monitor's program to re-open the CVE . . . There's a slight
chance . . .'

The Doctor's movement towards the Earth computer opened up a rift in the floor,
cracking the console. The disk drives juddered to a halt. 'Correction - there was a
slight chance.'

The Doctor fell to musing again, infuriating Tegan, who put her lips to his ear
and said loudly, as if she were talking to a deaf old man, 'Come on, Doctor. We've
got to stop the Master from taking off.'

The Time Lord raised an eyebrow. 'Why? There's no point in running from place
to place without a positive approach to take with us. The solution is here . . .
somehow . . .



Or somewhere very like this. I had a strange feeling we were very close - before
this!'

He tapped the Earth computer emphatically; a panel split and clattered to the
floor. The Doctor knelt down, absent-mindedly inspecting the damage. 'I sympathise,'
he said, patting the machine. 'I've never felt so close to dissolution before.'

Dissolution? The word sounded so final to Tegan. 'This can't really be the end,
Doctor. It can't be.'

The Doctor smiled up at her, as if only then reminded of her presence. 'Of course
it can't. Theremust be somethingwe can do. Some desperate, remote chance. Remote!'

He paused to savour this last word, as if there might be the flavour of salvation
in it.

'If it's remote it won't be here, will it, you stupid . . . Doctor!'

Tegan's voice betrayed her panic, but it came out as anger.

The Doctor's eyes flashed back in reply. He clapped his hands together. 'Of
course!

Here but not here! That's it.' He suddenly turned on what remained of the
computer, and began tearing it to pieces with his hands.

'Doctor! What are you doing?'

'An experiment in optimism. Come on, you can help. I want this thing in pieces.'

Utterly baffled, Tegan threw herself down beside him and helped him tear away
the brittle casing.

It seemed to take forever. There were several layers; some could be torn out like
damp cardboard, while others were solid and had to be eased out with the Doctor's
sonic screwdriver. By the time the interior lay exposed her hands were raw from the
effort.

The Doctor said little during the work, and when she had asked him three times
what on Earth he meant by 'here and not here' all he said was: 'Precisely - on Earth.'
And then he went very quiet, rolled back the voluminous sleeves of his coat and
reached into the wreckage.

The thing he eased out was a long rectangle the colour of emerald, to which was
attached a neat pattern of small objects that looked like large flat beetles with silver
legs. Tegan recognised them as some sort of electronic component.

The Doctor turned the board over in his hand, inspecting it carefully. 'As I
thought . . .

Bubble memory.' He handed the device to Tegan with a broad smile. 'Bubble
memory . .

. You realise what this means?'



'No, as a matter of fact I don't, Doctor.'

The Doctor reached into the machine again, and produced several more of the
flat boards, passing each one carefully over to Tegan. 'Bubble memory is non-volatile.

Remove the power - and the bit-patterns are still retained in tiny magnetic
domains in these chips.'

So that was the Doctor's idea! The Research Team's last program was still here,
in the pile of memory boards Tegan held in her hands. 'Which would be great if we
had a computer to run it on,' she said.

'But there is! Exactly like this one.' The Doctor grinned as the light began to
dawn in her eyes. 'On Earth, as you suggested.'

'The Pharos Project!' Tegan exclaimed.

'Exactly,' said the Doctor. 'Now al we have to do . . . is get there.'



11

'Master! Wait! There may be one last chance. Master!'

The Doctor's voice was hoarse with calling. Tegan took her turn, giving her loud
Aussie voice full rein. 'Master! Don't take off. Please . . . The Doc thinks he's got
the answer.'

Inwardly Tegan was close to despair. Screwing up their eyes against the gusts
of fine pink dust, she and the Doctor had trudged out from the ruins of the Central
Register in a wide sweep of the flattened landscape. It seemed to her that even if there
were something in the Doctor's crazy plan for the fragile memory boards she was
carrying, the chances were that the Master was long gone.

But the dismal wasted world of Logopolis presented the Doctor's sometimes
facile optimism with one small ray of hope. He thought - though the calculations to
confirm his theory would have taken several days - that a dematerialising TARDIS
would have to create a major disturbance to the unstable landscape, something they
were bound to notice. Apart from the constant cracking and shifting of the ground
beneath their feet there had been nothing on that scale since the landslide Tegan had
caused. If the Doctor's guess was right, the Master was still on Logopolis!

On the basis of this long shot they were trekking the dangerous territory, hoping
to run into the man the Doctor hated most in the whole universe. Tegan's dark doubts
grew with every precarious ruin they explored. But she was the one who found the
glove.

'Doctor! Over here!' She knelt and peered at the shiny black object. It was lying
palm up, partly covered by a mound of pink dust that had piled up around the base of
a flat fluted pillar lying horizontally along the back of the cell.

The Doctor seemed a long time coming; perhaps he had missed the cave. With
the idea of going to the entrance to cal again, she reached out to pick up the glove.

The black leather fingers closed tightly around her hand.

The Doctor heard Tegan's screams and arrived at a stumbling trot. In struggling
to escape she had pulled the hand out of the ground, revealing a flailing length of arm.

She was also in danger of bringing down what remained of the roof. The Doctor
clapped one hand firmly over her mouth and grabbing the disembodied arm with the
other heaved backwards with all his strength.

TheMaster's face emerged from the sand beneath the pillar. 'Just in time, Doctor,'
he said, spitting out dust. 'I have almost had my fill of Logopolis.'

The Master had stumbled through a multitude of ruins before finding the fat
fluted column jammed tightly into one corner of the cell, supporting the sagging roof.



In the geological upheaval it had shifted too close to the wall for him to be able to
open the door.

At first he had tugged at it impatiently, and then with violence. Powdered rock
plummeted from the roof, the pillar teetered and then crashed down towards him,
bringing with it a fresh cascade of rubble. The settling dust had brought an uneasy
silence to the cell. Trapped under the immense weight of his own TARDIS there was
nothing to do but wait.

Patience had brought its reward. Scrabbling with their hands at the loose ground
Tegan and the Doctor finally managed to prise the Master from under the pillar and
pull him to his feet.

The Master dusted himself down as best he could. 'I'm grateful, Doctor.'

'Splendid,' said the Doctor, 'because now it's your turn to help us.' He glanced
down at the pillar, and noticed that the door, normally concealed by the fluting, had
come ajar, hinting at the inky vastness of the interior. As the three of them hauled the
column upright, the Doctor added, 'One good lift deserves another, don't you think?
Next stop Earth.'

Adric had come to think of him as 'the Watcher', this strange friend of the
Doctor's who came and went like pictures in the fire, and never spoke. The Watcher
seemed to prefer solitude; now he wasn't even allowing them to share the console
room with him. It reminded Adric of the time the Doctor had put him outside the
door while he answered the cloister bell, except that now instead of Milton, Adric had
Nyssa to share the corridor with him. ‘But the Doctor usually lets me help him.' The
boy's protest went unheeded and the door closed.

'I don't think he needs our help,' Nyssa said. 'He seems to know what he's doing.'
When he had fetched her from Traken he hadn't said anything, just beckoned. But
there was something oddly familiar about the strange figure that had stopped her
feeling afraid. He seemed very like the Doctor in many ways, but so solemn, as if
he carried all the troubles of the world on his shoulders. 'It's as if he was watching
over me,' Nyssa said.

So Nyssa had that same feeling! Adric told her about the name he had privately
given him. 'I'm not afraid of the Watcher either,' the boy added. 'But I would like to
know who he is.'

Adric slowly turned the handle to peep into the console room. Through the
narrow crack in the door he could see the Watcher's hands drifting over the console
controls. 'He's setting the co-ordinates . . . no, he's . . .'

Adric had to stand on tiptoe to see better.

Nyssa hadn't approved of the idea of spying on the Watcher, but now she said
impatiently, 'Wel ? What is he doing?'



Adric caught his breath. 'He's unsetting the co-ordinates! He's disconnecting the
co-ordinate sub-system . . . But he can't do that. Not in mid-flight!'

'What is it? What's the matter?'

The boy slammed the door shut, and by way of answer to Nyssa's question
grabbed her and threw her roughly to the floor. At the same moment the TARDIS
rocked violently.

For several sickening oscillations the two companions rolled back and forth
across the pitching corridor. Then, as the movement stabilised, the solid walls around
them appeared to melt and glow, and everything within vision began to merge into a
single featureless field of brilliant white. A roaring sound filled the corridor. Over it
Adric heard Nyssa's voice. 'Adric? What's happening?'

He had to shout to be heard above the mounting noise. 'It's the Watcher. He's
taking us out of time and space altogether!'

Adric remained conscious, but for a long time he seemed to hover on the very
edge of existence, like a thought in search of a mind to think it. From time to time
he caught the sound of Nyssa's voice amidst the rush and roar that filled his head,
but the words were indistinct and may have been in his imagination, or perhaps in
hers. His mind brimmed over with the whiteness that had no boundary in space or
time. And then, slowly at first, the shapes came back. The twisting line where one
corridor wall met the floor, the horizontal plane of the door, the perfect circles of the
roundels inlaid into the panels, appeared one by one like fresh pencil-marks on blank
paper. Eventually the roaring died, leaving them in a silent, airy brightness that was
unmistakably the TARDIS

corridor, but somehow infinitelymore spacious between its insubstantial bounds.

Nyssa was sitting beside him on the floor, 'Is that where we are?' she asked, as
though nothing had interrupted the conversation. 'Outside space and time?'

'Yes,' said Adric. 'And hovering. The TARDIS isn't supposed to do that.'

Nyssa stood up. 'We seem to be safe.'

Adric scrambled to his feet beside her. 'Safe, yes. That's the point, I suppose. The
Doctor's told the Watcher to look after us.'

'I'd rather be with the Doctor,' said Nyssa.

'Me too,' Adric said. 'What are we going to do?' The boy knew, even as he asked,
that it was an empty question. Guided by theWatcher, the TARDIS hadmade the only
possible escape from the deadly collapse that was spreading out from Logopolis. But
the Doctor was in the middle of it, and now there was nothing they could do to help.

Nyssa's reply was calm and practical. 'Well, if the Watcher won't let us in the
console room, you'd better show me round the rest of the TARDIS.'



The technician reached out for the paper cup that stood somewhat incongruously
in front of the high-technology switches and LED indicators of the computer console.
He had been trying to crack the problem since starting his six o'clock shift that
evening, and here he was on the other side of midnight and range errors of two of the
global variables were still slipping through the compiler.

That was typical of the Pharos Project - month after month of no data coming in
from the antenna meant you filled in the time chasing petty errors out of the software
until your eyes popped. The moment he lifted the paper cup he realised it was empty.
The strains of Tchaikovsky's 'Nutcracker Suite' pouring into his ears through the
lightweight headphones were no substitute, coffee was what he needed. He got up,
stowing the cassette recorder into the pocket of his white lab coat, and, crushing the
cup and lobbing it expertly into the wastepaper basket, went out into the corridor to
wring fresh inspiration from the beverage dispenser.

The Pharos Project computer room was illuminated by a single lighting bar over
the console, which left pools of shadow in the remoter areas where the tape and disk
drives hummed on stand-by. No sooner had the technician moved out into the corridor
than a new voice joined the gentle chorus: a kind of chugging noise emanating from
a rapidly thickening patch of yellow that stained the gloom in one corner. The shape
congealed into a stubby pillar, Ionic in proportion, but with a leafy capital and base
reminiscent of the Corinthian order. A door, not a usual feature of its Ancient Greek
antecedents, opened up on one side, and the Master stepped into the room.

'You see,' he said quietly to the Doctor, who followed him, 'we have materialised
exactly on the co-ordinates.'

'Spot on,' the Doctor conceded. 'I envy you your TARDIS, Master.'

'Excellent, Doctor. You're improving. Envy is the beginning of all true greatness.'

Tegan followed the two Time Lords out of the TARDIS, and found herself in a
room so like the Monitor's Central Register, as it was before the disaster, that at first
she thought the destruction of Logopolis had only been a bad dream. And then from
the corridor she heard the jingle of coins in the automat; unmistakably an Earth sound.

The Doctor pul ed her back against the wall. The Master was on the other side
of the door when the technician came back into the room, sipping at his coffee. As
the door swung shut behind him, Tegan saw the Master taking an unpleasant-looking
piece of technology from his coat. He seemed to be levelling it at the technician.

The Doctor was beside him in an instant. 'No!' he said in a fierce whisper, pulling
the Master down behind a disk drive cabinet.

The Master calmly handed the device over to the Doctor. 'The light speed
overdrive from my TARDIS. You'll need it for transmission.' His eyes twinkled with
a mockery of innocence.



'I'm sorry,' said the Doctor. 'I thought . . .’

'That I would kill him, Doctor? Why should I, when you have the time and
patience to explain our presence to this gentleman.' There was no mistaking the
sarcasm in the Master's voice.

'Yes, well . . . I can try.'

Signalling to Tegan to get the memory boards from the Master's TARDIS the
Doctor stood up. The technician was totally immersed in his music and his
computations; it was certainly going to be awkward, the Doctor realised, to announce
their presence without frightening the life out of him.

Such humane considerations were no hindrance to the Master, crouched behind
the cabinet. Unfortunately for his plans he had just aligned the re-dimensioner on the
precise site of the posterior cerebellar notch at the back of the technician's skull when
Tegan re-emerged from the TARDIS with the printed circuit boards. Instinctively she
cried out.

TheDoctor's head swivelled round immediately, and at the same time theweapon
flashed in the Master's hand. But before the energy beam had time to arrive at its
target the Doctor had dived at the technician, sending him skimming across the room
on the casters of his chair.

The Doctor turned his fury on the Master. 'There must be no more deaths!'

'Never mind. You've solved our problem, Doctor.' He jerked a thumb towards
where the technician lay, a crumpled unconscious heap against the wall. The Master
ripped off the headphones and dropped them into the wastepaper basket while the
Doctor checked the man's pulse and made him comfortable on the floor.

'I feel we've been spared a very difficult conversation,' said the Master.

Then he turned to Tegan, snapping his fingers. 'Come along, now. Door . . .
blinds . . .

lights. If this interesting scheme is to work, there's a great deal to be done before
dawn.'

Giving much thought to the task they were about to embark upon, the Doctor
absent-mindedly stirred the technician's coffee with a pencil and raised it to his lips.

Despite the confusing new spaciousness of the corridors, Adric had managed to
find the TARDIS cloister room again. He walked round the perimeter with Nyssa,
pointing out the crumbling stonework that had started off the Doctor on his resolve
to repair his ship.

It looked particularly shoddy in the over-lit brilliance induced by timelessness
and spacelessness.



'Things in the TARDIS often stop working for no reason,' the boy said. 'The
Doctor's very good at coping with it, but it's a terrific strain on him.'

'Entropy again,' Nyssa said. 'You can't get away from it.'

Adric stopped suddenly, looking across to the other side of the cloisters. A white
shape was visible through the foliage, pacing restlessly backwards and forwards much
as the Doctor had done the day Adric had first discovered the cloister room.

'It's uncanny! From here . . . it might almost be the Doctor.'

The echo of Adric's whispered remark to Nyssa must have carried around the
wall to the other side of the cloisters, because at that moment the Watcher stopped
pacing and looked in the direction of the two companions. And exactly as the Doctor
had done before, the Watcher took a pace forward and beckoned to Adric across the
quad.

Nyssa wanted to hear all about what the Watcher had said, but explanations had
to wait while Adric hurried her through the white brilliance of the corridors and back
to the console room.

'Are we travelling again?' Nyssa asked, closing the door behind her. 'We have to
log in the co-ordinate sub-systems first.' Adric waited until the row of yellow lights
were al glowing above the set of initiation switches. Then he unlocked the sub-system
panel, as he had seen the Doctor do so many times before.

'He actually spoke to you?' asked Nyssa.

'Yes, of course,' said Adric, smoothing out the piece of paper the Watcher had
given him. He hesitated. 'At least . . . yes, he must have spoken to me.' He had the
distinct impression that it had been a conversation, but when he tried to remember
what the Watcher's voice was like he could only hear the Doctor speaking.

'We're going back into space and time?' asked Nyssa, looking over Adric's
shoulder at the writing on the paper. 'What changed his mind?'

'It didn't change,' Adric told her, surprised at his own confidence. It was
impossible for him to know the Watcher's thoughts, and yet he felt sure their new
companion was in some way part of the future. His mind hadn't changed because he
knew - he had always known - what was going to happen.

Nyssa wanted to be shown how the TARDIS worked, but unlike Tegan her
scientifically trained mind was not to be thrown into confusion by long words. Adric
explained as much as he knew, but had to confess that most of the theory was too
complicated even for his mathematical brain.

Luckily the Watcher had told him exactly what to do. According to the piece
of paper, Earth was in sector eighty twenty-five of the third quadrant. 'The temporal



settings are laid in on this panel . . .' Adric told her. 'It always looks so easy when
the Doctor does it.'

'But where are we going?'

'The Pharos Project. Now just leave me alone for a bit. I have to do some
calculations.'

Adric settled in front of a small keyboard set into the console. Nyssa turned to
the viewer screen, and saw a starfield, a million glittering diamonds scattered across
a cushion of black velvet. From outside space and time she was looking down on an
image of the whole universe.

Adric finished his calculations and came to stand beside her. Curved lines like
meteorological isobars were inching across the screen, and as they advanced, the stars
they covered dimmed and died. It was as though some black ink blot were spreading
across the universe, indelibly staining out the light.

Nyssa pointed to the awesome blackness of the encroaching blot. 'Look at the
entropy field. It's huge now.' Then a thought occurred to her. 'Is Earth on this star
map?'

Adric pursed his lips for a moment, then indicated the edge of the map furthest
from the invading darkness. 'This is Earth's galaxy. Somewhere here. The Earth
people have a few hours left.'

'And Traken?' asked Nyssa.

The question took Adric by surprise. He waved his finger vaguely around the
middle of the screen and said, 'Traken should be . . . Traken's . . .' And then he realised
that it lay directly under the spreading dark stain of entropy.

'That's funny,' said Nyssa. 'I can't even see Mettula Orionsis . . .' And then she
tailed off as she saw Adric's face.

'I'm sorry, Nyssa . . . I'll switch it off.'

She stopped him as he was reaching for the switch. 'No! Wait!' She wanted to
look a little longer, giving herself time to absorb the knowledge that the death of her
father had been fol owed by the destruction of her whole world. She had never hated
the Master so much as she did at that moment. 'He killed my step-mother, and then
my father . . . and now this! The world I grew up in - blotted out forever!'

Adric took hold of her hands. She looked at him for a moment, her eyes wet
with tears.

Then gently releasing herself from him she reached out and flicked off the
viewer.



A moment later the time column juddered into life, and the lighting began to
whiten again, bleaching out the shapes around them. 'Hold on,' said Adric. 'We're
going back now.'

The two companions gripped the console for support as the room filled with the
roaring noise that announced the beginning of their re-entry into space and time.



12

Tegan helped the Doctor and the Master unscrew the side of the computer
cabinet, then she left them with the memory boards and peeped out into the corridor.
The echoing darkness hummed faintly with the sound of distant machinery as she
tiptoed to a window at the end and pulled down a slat of the Venetian blinds. They
were on the second floor of a building that looked down onto a fenced-off area. In
the light of the high yellow lamps slung between tall poles below, the long low huts
looked like a tangle of barges moored in the black asphalt. Beyond the huts the high
wire fencing was interrupted by a main gate, approached by a wide open space. Tegan
deduced from the white markings that it was partially a car park. Over it all a huge
skeletal structure rose up into the night sky like the Eiffel Tower; but instead of
coming to a point it bloomed into the familiar shape of a vast metal bowl. The Pharos
antenna, she thought. The original of the one on Logopolis.

The two Time Lords worked on through the night, and Tegan kept returning
to the window, until the dark horizon began to sharpen with an edge of silver. 'The
dawn's coming up,' she whispered, coming back into the computer room. 'And they've
got security guards out there.' She had noticed dark shapes moving by the main gate.

The collaboration between the two Time Lords was not going entirely smoothly.
At the Doctor's signal the Master prodded the console keyboard again. 'It's still not
running.

The program is useless.'

'The Monitor gave his life trying to complete it,' the Doctor replied sharply. 'We
must try to do him justice.'

'Indeed? And what makes you so sure this is going to work?'

The Doctor smiled pleasantly and took over the keyboard. 'While there's life, it's
six of one and half a dozen of the other.'

'Woolly thinking, Doctor,' sneered the Master.

'Very comforting, when worn next to the skin.'

The keyboard clattered under the Doctor's fingers for a moment or two. The
Master leaned over to inspect the screen, which had begun to fill with figures. 'It's
running,' he said, a note of surprise in his voice. 'If you can call this alien gibberish
a program.'

'We'll know once we've managed to download it onto the antenna. Now, in view
of the guards out there - or rather, to avoid being in view of the guards - I suggest
we pop across in your TARDIS.'

The Master tapped the light speed overdrive, which was sticking out of the
Doctor's top pocket. 'Not unless we deplete this, and we'll need it for transmission.'



The Doctor eyed him suspiciously. 'Are you sure?'

'Of course I'm sure. The mean free path would be reduced to a matter of
millimetres. It can't be done, Doctor.' Mockingly he added, 'Not even with faith and
hope.'

The Doctor glanced at the door. 'Al right, we'll risk the guards. But we'll have
to be careful.'

The TARDIS carrying Adric and Nyssa had arrived at its destination, and
materialised discreetly in the shadows around the base of the Pharos antenna. Inside,
the two companions had been watching the huge basket-like structure on the viewer
screen.

'So that's what the Earth people are using to beam messages to the stars,' said
Nyssa.

'Trying to call up alien intelligences.'

'Then they should be very pleased to see us,' Adric said, pulling the door-release
lever.

'Except that they won't be.' The sound of dawn birdsong filtered in as the big
double door swung inwards.

'Why not?' Nyssa asked.

'People never are when they get what they've always wanted,' Adric replied.

'You'll see.'

Together they stepped cautiously out into the cold morning air and ran for cover.

At the end of the corridor the Doctor paused to lift a slat of the venetian blinds.
Tucked into the shadows on the far side of the car park, he saw the unmistakable blue
shape of the TARDIS.

The double doors were ajar, and in the opening loomed the vague outline of the
figure that had fol owed him to Logopolis and back. Something distinctly proprietorial
about the patient way he waited in the TARDIS entrance sent a chill through the
Doctor's body.

'Hey, Doc, are you OK?' Tegan was by his side, recalling him to the business
in hand.

TheDoctor turned from thewindow, instantly himself again. He knew the danger
of showing any sign of weakness in front of the Master. 'This is going to need split-
second timing,' he said crisply. 'We've got to get across to the antenna control room
and re-align it on whatever's left of Logopolis. That way we should be near enough
to that CVE the Monitor was trying to re-open.



The Master confirmed the plan with a nod.

'Good,' said the Doctor. 'Then follow me. And watch out for those security
guards.'

Downstairs the sonic screwdriver made quick work of the chain on the safety
door that lead out into the enclosure, and from there it was a short sprint across open
ground to the cover of the row of huts. They pressed themselves up against the wall
while a group of early morning workmen wheeled their bicycles in through the main
gate and ambled past within a few feet from where they stood. The Doctor
contemplated the open ground between them and the antenna, mounted on its cluster
of girders and gantries. The sky was getting lighter, and every delay made the venture
more dangerous. Just as he judged it right to move, two security men pulled open the
main gate, allowing a car to roll slowly in towards the Doctor and his party, cutting
off their direct route to the antenna.

The Doctor pul ed Tegan back into the shadow of the huts, but behind them the
Master, tiring of the delay, reached into his coat for the weapon he had intended to
use on the technician.

The Doctor noticed the movement, and turned in time to grab the weapon just as
it was about to go off. But the noise of the scuffle alerted the two security men, and
a voice shouted, 'Intruders! Come on, after them!'

The Doctor broke cover, and Tegan had no choice but to follow his flapping scarf
and coat. This wasn't her idea of fun, playing some maniac game of tag, in and out of
the low buildings. At least the Doctor seemed to have some sense of the geography
of the place, avoiding the culs-de-sacs between the huts. Then they rounded a corner
and ran straight into the workmen. There was a sudden tangle of limbs and a clatter
of bicycles.

Tegan managed to evade the grabbing hands, but with his great loose coat and
his flying scarf the Doctor was an easier quarry. Looking behind her Tegan saw the
security men closing in.

Then came a brief flash of light and a short sizzling sound. The Doctor looked
up from his struggle to see the Master had missed his aim at the workmen, but was
still pointing the deadly weapon. With a howl of rage he shook off his assailants and
dived for the Master, grabbing the device and hurling it across the asphalt path.

'Sentimental fool,' hissed the Master, throwing him back against one of the huts.
'Thanks to you we're weaponless.' The Doctor hit the slatted walls with a thud

that knocked the air from his lungs.

If it hadn't been for the intervention of Adric and Nyssa at that moment he would
certainly have been captured. At the approach of the workmen with their bicycles
the two companions had shrunk back behind a water barrel outside one of the huts.
Adric knew that the Watcher had brought them there to help the Doctor, but until the
moment came he hadn't been sure exactly how.



Unfortunately Tegan had a very similar idea. As the two security men came
pounding up to the scene she rushed forward waving her arms and shouting at the top
of her voice, 'You've got all this totally topsy-turvy. The Doctor's here to help, and if
you stop him it could be the last thing you'll ever do.'

At the same timeAdric hadmoved out into the open. He hadn't intended to topple
the water barrel on the way, but the result certainly heightened the atmosphere of total
confusion that was suddenly unleashed on the Pharos Project.

While Nyssa signalled to Tegan to stay quiet, Adric declared loudly: 'Nyssa and
I have heard your message across the universe and have come to answer your cal .'

The Master tugged at the Doctor's coat. 'You and I have work to do,' he
whispered.

Though reluctant to leave his companions, the Doctor was bound to agree. He
followed the Master discreetly out of sight, around the corner of the hut.

'Message?' one of the security men was saying. 'What? Who are you people?' It
was Nyssa's turn for theatricalities. 'We are the alien beings you seek.'

'We are intelligences from deep space,' Adric chimed in. The chief security man
gestured ineffectually for silence. 'Now just a minute . . . Please!'

'Every word of this is true,' Tegan shouted, her outback Aussie voice easily the
loudest present. 'Wel , come on, you lot! Don't just stand about. Let's go and see
someone in authority!'

The Doctor found himself running towards the antenna on his own. At the absurd
risk of being seen by the security men the Master had hung back, losing precious
moments to scan the ground. He wasn't going to let the Doctor's delicate sensibilities
deprive him of the companionship of his favourite weapon.

Luckily for the Master, the two security men and the workmen were engrossed
in their interrogation of Tegan, Adric and Nyssa. He scooped up the weapon and,
with a sardonic glance in the direction of the antenna, where the Doctor could be seen
beginning the long climb up the steel ladder, he doubled back towards the computer
room.

The technician was stirring. His first, and last, conscious awareness was of
powerful arms grabbing his white coat and hauling him to his feet. He felt cold metal
against the side of his head, and then there was a sizzle and a smell of ozone and the
world exploded into a giant dome of light. The Master pocketed the cassette recorder.
A moment later he and the plump fluted column had vanished from the computer
room.

From the door of the TARDIS the Watcher had seen the Master retracing his
steps to the computer room, as he saw now the Doctor's perilous ascent of the Pharos
antenna.



These were the conditions of the moment he knew had to come. In his mind was
a clock, its hands closing on the inevitable vertical of midnight.

The higher the Doctor climbed the more the wind lashed at him, bellowing out
his coat like some wild red sail. His hands ached on the cold metal rungs, and at one
point he paused to fumble in his pockets for gloves. He took the opportunity to look
down to the dizzyingly diminished enclosure, just in time to see the tiny figures of
Adric, Nyssa and Tegan being marched into the building by the security guards.

There were no gloves, and by the time he arrived at the parapet his knuckles
were blue.

He leant for a moment against the rail and took stock of the geography. The
articulating structure he was standing on was designed to revolve about the base as
the antenna tracked across the sky. The swaying metal walkway ahead formed a long
thin bridge across to the bowl of the parabolic aerial. The cable strapped to the railing
like the sinew of a giant arm lead back from the bowl to a large box-like construction
near where the Doctor stood. He pushed open the door and looked inside. As he had
deduced from the cable, it was the antenna control room.What he had not expected to
find was the Master, calmly making connections to an electrical conduit in the wall.

'I decided to use my TARDIS after all,' the Master said without interrupting his
work.

The Doctor noticed the ugly column in one corner of the room. He took out the
light speed overdrive from his top pocket. 'You didn't miss this?' 'I gave you that to
demonstrate my trust, Doctor. But I do not take foolish risks. There is the real light
speed overdrive.'

The Master waved towards the work-bench, where a similar device glowed
among the dials and switches. 'We have only to connect this feed from the computer
room, and the job is done.' He handed the end of the jumper wire to the Doctor. 'As
you devised the plan, I think the honour should be yours, Doctor.' And with that he
strolled out onto the parapet.

The Doctor ran his eye over the work-bench. The light speed overdrive was
hooked into the oscilloscope that metered the radio frequency output to the antenna. It
wasn't an ideal arrangement, but as a quick improvisation it was perfectly workable.
Once again the Doctor had to admit admiration for theMaster's ingenious practicality.
With the sonic screwdriver in one hand and the jumper wire in the other he began to
complete the task.

Outside, the Master looked down over the rail to the enclosure far below, where
with a flurry of activity the establishment was beginning its working day. His thin
lips curled into a smile. 'Alien intelligences! I'll show them the quality of alien
intelligence.'

From his pocket he took the looted cassette recorder and, softly in order to avoid
alerting the Doctor in the room behind him, began to speak into it.



'Peoples of the universe. Please attend carefully. The message that fol ows is
vital to the future of all of you . . . '

With a sense of satisfaction the Doctor rapidly checked the connections he had
made.

The moment had come to throw the switch.

A deep grinding sound shook the room as the whole steel structure began to
move, rotating the basket-like bowl of the antenna to point at a pin-prick in the heavens
he had plotted on the co-ordinator. He studied the small circular screen of the
oscilloscope excitedly and reached out to make a minute adjustment to one of the
dials. The cable was now feeding the analogue converter with a regular flow of digital
input from the computer room, and as far as the Doctor could judge from the feedback
patterns the transmission link was established. The data was reaching the CVE, and
it was stabilising!

He heard a chuckle behind him. 'So it works! Congratulations, Doctor. I always
knew you would do it.'

'You did most of this,' the Doctor conceded generously.

'Oh no . . . I was little more than a humble assistant. I have learnt a great deal.
And now it is time for you to go and explain the presence of your friends. There's
quite a hubbub outside.'

The Doctor got up from the work-bench. 'Quite right. We'd better leave this until
the new equilibrium is established. A mistake now could destroy everything.'

'I know that, Doctor. And it could happen so easily.'

Something in that level, mocking voice made the Doctor hesitate at the door.
'What do you mean?'

The cold dark eyes gazed back unblinkingly. 'The universe is hanging on a
thread. A single inversion pulse down that cable and the CVE would close forever.
Even a humble assistant could do it.' While he spoke the Master placed the cassette
machine on the work-bench and bent the goose neck of the talk-back microphone
down towards it. His finger prodded the play-back button.

The Doctor listened in horror to the whisper that came thinly from the miniature
loudspeaker. 'The message that follows is vital to the future of all of you . . . At
the time of speaking the fate of the universe hangs in the balance, and the fulcrum
of that balance is the Pharos Project on Earth. It is from there that I am speaking.
The choice for you all is simple: a continued existence under my guidance, or total
annihilation . . .’

The Doctor had heard enough. 'Blackmail!' he exclaimed.



'No, Doctor. I am simply reporting the state of affairs. I have the power now to
save them or destroy them.'

'You're utterly mad!' The Doctor made a move forward.

But the Master already had the weapon levelled at the Doctor's head. 'Please stay
where you are. We cannot have the proceedings interrupted.' From his pocket he took
the silver device the Doctor had seen him use to devastating effect on Logopolis and
clipped it neatly on to the end of the light speed overdrive. 'Now the CVE is mine,
Doctor.'

The Doctor edged away, as if intimidated by the weapon. He had no illusions
about its unpleasant consequences, but his main object was to get nearer the door.
There was a good chance the CVE had stabilised by now, and it would only be under
the Master's power as long as the link between it and the improvised apparatus held.
The Doctor remembered the long cable that snaked between the control room and the
parabolic aerial.

Perhaps there was a way to stop this final catastrophe. The Doctor dived out
through the door, slamming it behind him.

Themetal plates of the swayingwalkway clattered under his feet. Dwarfed by the
gigantic proportions of the great bowl, the Doctor raced across the tenuous bridge that
hung in the air between the control room and the aerial. His eye scanned the handrail,
tracing the path of the cable along its length. Somewhere there had to be a junction he
could disconnect. Over the sound of the wind he heard the Master's voice behind him.

'Don't make any plans, Doctor. Your future ends here.'

The Doctor threw himself flat on the walkway as the beam struck sparks from
the rail.

Assuming a five-second recharge cycle for the weapon the Doctor scrambled to
his feet again, ran on - and dived again. To his horror the shot did not come. The
Master had outguessed him, and now he was a sitting target.

The Doctor jerked his head round to look back, and was astonished to find the
Master's face grinning at him from behind the glass of the control room window. Of
course! With his target so close to the antenna the Master dared not risk firing a high-
energy beam. A ricochet could disrupt transmission. But what was he up to now?

The Doctor dismissed the question and, obeying the First Law of Crisis,
concentrated on the cable. At the point where he now lay, it branched away from the
railing and ran directly under the walkway. He put his head over the edge and saw the
smooth line of the insulation interrupted by a bulky contusion. The connector he was
looking for lay directly beneath him. So did a postage-stamp-sized stretch of asphalt
car park. But he tried not to think of that as he climbed through the railing.

At that instant he discovered what the Master was up to in the control room. The
whole walkway began to tilt with alarming speed, pitching him forward into space.
The Doctor grabbed for the only handhold he could see, the cable itself.



It sagged under his weight, and then with a sickening snapping sound the ties on
either side broke away from the struts, jerking him down until he hung fifteen feet
below the girders. His hands gripped the bottom of the U formed by the cable, and he
swung there with nothing beneath the soles of his shoes but thin air.

The positive aspect of the situation was that he now had control over the
connector. The negative side of life had also to be faced: if he were to separate the
connector, as it flew apart there would be very little chance of holding on to both ends.
And whichever end he chose would almost certainly not bear his weight.

But the Master was poised to destroy the CVE. The cable powered a gigantic
weapon that put the whole universe in the palm of his hand.

The angry thought silenced all debate. Inching his fingers backwards and
forwards the Doctor began to unscrew the casing.

A picture floated into his mind of a distant, vaguely formed figure, folded back
from the time that was to come by the turmoil of the present. Even as he methodically
continued the rocking movement of his hands, screwing out the thread millimetre by
millimetre, he had a sense of those eyes watching him: his own eyes from the future.

Tegan, Nyssa and Adric were being marched out of the building towards the
waiting van when one of the security guards shouted, 'Up there! Come on!' The
exclamation triggered a sudden flurry of officialdom towards the base of the antenna,
and the three companions found themselves abandoned by most of their interrogators.

Adric cricked his neck upwards, and gasped to see the tiny figure swinging from
the loop of cable below the walkway. The Doctor's plan must have gone hideously
wrong.

Officials were clambering up the ladder, and for a moment there seemed to be a
chance they would reach him if he could hang on long enough.

But as the helpless companions watched, the loop of cable sprayed out a cascade
of sparks and came apart. For a fraction of a second the tiny figure swung on a single
thread. And then it snapped.

Adric, Nyssa and Tegan ran across the asphalt towards the hideously crumpled
shape on the ground. It seemed impossible that he should still be alive. But they saw
the contorted figure move, and a feebly lifted arm motioned them to stay back.

Adric, who was closest, heard the familiar voice. 'This is the end . . . but the
moment has been prepared for.'

TheDoctor struggled to lift his head, and reached out a hand towards the shadows
behind him, as if he expected someone to be there. Adric blinked: there was someone
there. A vague featureless figure stepped forward without a sound and took the



Doctor's hand. It was as if the Watcher had been waiting there at the base of the
antenna for the Doctor's fall.

Tegan's voice was a hoarse whisper. 'What's happening to him?'

The Doctor's arm contracted, drawing the Watcher towards him, closer and
closer until the two shapes seemed to blend. The faces melted together and became
formless.

'He's changing . . . ' said Adric. 'The Doctor's regenerating.'

Nyssa stared as the Doctor and the Watcher melted into a blur. 'So the Watcher
was the Doctor all the time . . .!'

The figure on the ground straightened its limbs and sat up slowly. A smoother,
younger face was beaming somewhat vacuously up at them. 'Well, that's the end of
that,' said a voice they had not heard before. 'But it's probably the beginning of
something completely different.'



Document Outline

• Front Cover
• Back Cover text
• Title Page
• Copyright
• Chapter 1
• Chapter 2
• Chapter 3
• Chapter 4
• Chapter 5
• Chapter 6
• Chapter 7
• Chapter 8
• Chapter 9
• Chapter 10
• Chapter 11
• Chapter 12



Table of Contents
Front Cover
Back Cover text
Title Page
Copyright
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12