DOCTORWHO
AND NIGHTMARE OF EDEN

By TERRANCE DICKS

1 Warp Smash
It should have been impossible - but it happened.
So enormous are the distances between the stars that even at light-speed,

journeys of hundreds, even thousands, of years are necessary to cross them. Only
the invention of warp drive made interstellaf travel a practical possibility. Warp
drive enables space ships to leave normal space and enter hyperspace, travelling
colossal distances in a flash.

Once man discovered warp drive his space ships spread out over his own
galaxy in a wave and even began exploring the galaxies beyond. In time
interstellar travel became routine - but there were still dangers. One of them was
warp smash.

A ship tries to leave hyperspace at exactly the same point occupied by
another; two sets of atoms andmolecules try to fill the same position in space and
time; the result, instant mutual annihilation. However, there were exceptions,
freak accidents in which the impossible happened.

This was to be one of them.
The Intersellar Cruise Liner Empress flashed through hyperspace en route

for the pleasure-planet Azure, .sun-kissed jewel of the galaxy, where her
hundreds of tourist passengers could indulge themselves in all the pleasures of
warm seas, perpetually blue skies, and long beaches of fine blue sand. Their
journey was almost over. Soon the Empress would emerge into normal space
and enter landing orbit around the planet.

In the big old-fashioned control room of the Empress Captain Rigg was
feeling worried, and was trying to work out why. There didn't seem to be
anything to worry about. The spacious control room was functioning with its
usual calm efficiency. The Empress was old now, but she had been solidly built
in the vintage years of space travel. Her computerised controls could have flown
and landed the ship almost without human aid. Secker, the navigator, certainly
wasn't worried. He was lounging at his instrument console, smiling vaguely,
completely and utterly relaxed.

That was the trouble, Rigg decided. Secker was too relaxed. Re-entry from
hyperspace was one of the traditional crisis-points in space travel - just like
takeoff and landing in the good old days of powered atmospheric flight. Any
good spaceman ought to be a little worried at a time like this. There should be
a tension, an awareness that, although this might be only the latest of hundreds
of uneventful re-entries, it was possible, however unlikely, that something could
go wrong.

Perhaps it was just because Secker was so young. Rigg himself was a tough,
balding veteran, near the age-limit for a space pilot. He had never flown with
Secker before, though he knew that the young man was reputed to be one of the
most brilliant navigators in the service. 'We seem to be a little ahead of schedule,
Secker.'



'Great! Sooner we get in the better.' Rigg flicked the intercom switch.
'Captain here. We are coming out of warp drive in thirty seconds Standard
passenger announcement, please.

In the passenger area, bored and weary tourists were dozing, viewing video
cassettes, listening to stereo tapes, nibbling snacks, eating and drinking and
chatting with their neighbours. The space coveralls and projective goggles they
all wore made them look terrifyingly similar, like rows of dolls on a production
line.

There was a musical chime and an inhumanly calm and soothing voice.
'This is your flight computer speaking. We are about to leave warp drive and
re-enter normal space in orbit around the planet Azure. Passengers may leave
their seats when the blue light comes on, but are requested not to remove their
protective coveralls until instructed.' There was a pause as the lights on the
display panel flicked from blue to amber, and then to red. 'Passengers are
requested to remember that the Empresswill be at seven-tenths G upon re-entry.
Please be careful when you start to move around.'

The warning was a very necessary one. It was not unknown for
inexperienced space travellers to leap eagerly from their seats and go hurtling
across the cabin.

The passengers settled back, preparing themselves for the odd wrenching
sensation that always came on entering and leaving hyperspace.

With a final uneasy glance at Secker, Captain Rigg leaned forward to study
the display screen on his console. Like most spacemen, like pilots before them,
and like sailors before them, Rigg was deeply superstitious. He couldn't help
feeling that such careless self-assurance positively invited disaster. He punched
up the preset re-entry co-ordinates, and multi-coloured trajectories of light began
snaking over the screen. A red light started flashing on Bigg's console. 'I've got
a malfunction...' He leaned forward studying the screen. 'Secker, there's a three-
degree error in these co-ordinates!'

'What's a few degrees, Skipper?'
'A few degrees?' Rigg was almost choking with rage. 'What's the matter

with you, man? We're flying an Interstellar Cruiser, not riding a bike!'
'So?'
'So our orbit will be fractionally out. It'll mean delay in landing.'
Secker shrugged, and Rigg turned angrily away. In actual fact, the error was

unlikely to cause much of a problem. It would just mean an extra hour's delay
for the impatient tourists. It was the sheer unprofessionalism of Secker's attitude
that was so infuriating.

Rigg was about to reset the co-ordinates when there was a fiercely urgent
alarm-bleep and red lights flashed all over his console. He looked at the forward-
vision screen and gave a gasp of horror.

Another space ship was heading straight towards them.
The other ship was the survey vessel Hecate, also en route for Azure. The

slender Hecate transfixed the huge dematerialising bulk of the Empress like an
arrow, but astonishingly there was no impact. Instead the Empress seemed to
materialise aroundHecate, so that the two ships were locked together in a strange
and deadly embrace.



Astonished to find himself still alive, Rigg hit the distress button.
'Emergency! Emergency! Mayday! Mayday! Mayday! Cruise Liner Empress
reporting space collision on approach to Azure.' He flicked the intercom. 'Bridge
here. Damage control report immediately, please.'

Two spacesuited crewmen ran down the central corridor of the ship - and
stopped in astonishment they found themselves facing a strange blurred zone,
where the two ships seemed to merge. One of them spoke into his hand
communicator. 'We've found one of the junction points, sir. It's incredible - as
though the two ships were sticking through each other.'

Rigg's voice crackled urgently. 'Any hull leakage?! How's the pressure?'
'Everything seems to be normal. But we can't get through to the main

passenger section. They're blocked off by the hull of the other ship - it's sticking!
right through the entrance to B-deck.'

Rigg snapped, 'A-deck, report, A-deck, report. Any casualties?'
There was no reply. He swung round to Secker. 'Any more damage

estimates yet?'
Secker smiled foolishly at him. Rigg sprang across the cabin, gripped the

younger man by the shoulders and lifted him bodily from his seat. This is all your
fault, Secker! But it's my responsibility, I carry the can. I'll probably lose my job
- but I'll see you never work in this galaxy again.' Rigg slid into Secker's place.
'I'll make the damage checks, you check the power. Come on, move yourself.
This is an emergency.

In another part of the ship, close to one of the blurred junction areas, there
was a wheezing, groaning sound. A blue police box materialised from nowhere.

A tall curly-haired man in a floppy broad-brimmed hat and long trailing
scarf came out of the police box and stood looking cautiously about him. He
was followed by a small, very pretty fair-haired girl in a neat grey dress. Behind
her glided something that looked like a robot dog. The blue box was in reality a
highly sophisticated space/time craft called the TARDIS.

The tall man was that mysterious traveller known as the Doctor, the girl was
his companion Romana, and the robot dog was a mobile computer called K9.
They had picked up the Empress'sMayday call and the Doctot had been unable
to resist the temptation to investigate.

He pointed to the blurred area just ahead of them.
'Just look at that, eh? Isn't that interesting?'
'Fascinating,' said Romana drily. She had never been able to understand the

Doctor's habit of rushing straight into trouble at the first available opportunity.
The Doctor moved closer to the blurred area, examining it with interest.

It looked like nothing so much as a belt of frozen fog, through which could be
discerned the shadowy outlines of the hull of another ship, somehow inside the
first. 'Bit of a mishmash, eh?'

'Why wasn't there an explosion?'
'This ship must have been emerging from hyperspace when it all happened.

It materialised around the smaller one - a sort of a freak accident, very nasty.
Now they've really got a problem, haven't they, K9?'

K9 glided forward, scanning the blurred zonewith his sensors. 'Affirmative.
Matter interfaces at overlapped areas are highly unstable.'



The crash should have caused a shattering explosion that would have
destroyed both ships. Now that explosion had been frozen - but if the interfaces
gave way, it could take place at any moment. The two linked ships were a highly
unstable time-bomb. 'Perhaps we shouldn't interfere?' said Romana hopefully.

The Doctor gave her a puzzled look. 'Not interfere? Of course we should
interfere. Always do what you're best at, that's what I say!' He marched down
the corridor.

Resignedly Romana followed. The Doctor had been interfering in another
people's problems all his lives. It was too late to expect him to stop now.

They came to the end of the corridor, turned right and found themselves
facing a sign that read 'AIRLOCK'. There was a heavy metal door just beneath
the sign - and it was opening.

The Doctor and his companions ducked back round the corner.
A burly, fair-haired man in space coveralls came out of the airlock, glanced

round as if to get his bearings, then set off down the main corridor.
'Who's that?' whispered Romana.
'The Captain of the other space ship, I should imagine, coming to make a

complaint! Let's follow him, shall we? Should be an interesting encounter.'
They followed the spacesuited man through the wide metal corridors until

he turned into the doorway of what was obviously the main control room. The
Doctor held up his hand and they paused, waiting. After a moment there came
the sound of angry voices. The Doctor motioned his companions forward.

They found themselves in a huge, old-fashioned control room, packed with
computerised equipment. At the far end was the bridge, a raised control area
with seats for pilot and co-pilot, control consoles and viewing screens in front
of them. The man they had followed was shouting at a thick-set, balding man in
a black-and-gold uniform, who sat hunched in the pilot's seat. 'What I want to
know is, what are you going to do about the damage to my ship?'

The second man punched controls and a computerised chart of the ship
appeared on the vision screen. 'All I'm concerned with is the damage to my ship
and the safety of my crew - not to mention several hundred passengers. The
Empress carries comprehensive insurance, so you needn't worry.'

'I was on my way to a most important survey job when you came crashing
in on me. Now you tell me not to worry! What am I going to do for a ship?'

'I'm sure the company will compensate you in full. Why don't you just go
back to your ship, wait for the experts to arrive, and get in touch with your
insurance people?'

'Don't worry, I will. And I shall insist that you sign a document admitting
that the collision was entirely your fault.'

'I'll do no such thing!What were you doing there anyway, right in themiddle
of a commercial descent-area?'

'I was given full clearance by Azure control. You were the one off course.'
The wrangle went on. The Doctor noticed that! there was a third man in the

room, a younger man, who watched the argument with a vague foolish smile, as
if it didn't really concern him.

The argument between the two Captains raged on, voices getting louder and
angrier, charges and countercharges flying across the room.



The Doctor decided it was time to intervene. He stepped forward.
'Gentlemen, gentlemen, please. Can't we settle this matter amicably?'

The Empress Captain glared indignantly at him. 'Who the blazes are you -
and what are you doing in my control room. Are you a passenger?'

The Doctor thought hard and came up with a sudden bright idea. 'No, no,
I'm with Galactic salvage. We heard your Mayday call and came to have a look
around.' The Doctor went on talking rapidly before anyone had time to question
this rather flimsy story. I'm the Doctor and this is my assistant, Romana. He
beamed at the two astonished Captains. 'How do you do?'

Automatically the Captain nodded to Romana 'How do you do?' His eyes
widened as he noticed K9 for the first time. 'What's that?'

The Doctor glanced down. 'That's K9. He's a sort of computer.'
'Looks more like a robot dog. Does it bark?'
'No, but he has been known to bite. Would you be kind enough to introduce

yourselves?'
The Captain found himself obeying, without quite knowing why. 'My

name's Rigg, I'm the Captain of this vessel.'
'I know that, we've just met! What about these other gentlemen?'
'This is Captain Dymond. He's the Captain of the other vessel involved in

this - incident.'
'How do you do?'
Rigg jerked a thumb at the man in the comer. 'That's Secker, my navigator.

Now then, Doctor, you say you're in the salvage business? You realise I can't
even discuss such matters till I've spoken with Head Office?'

The Doctor said, 'No need to bother them. I ve got a much better idea. Why
don't we just separate the ships?'



2. The Collector

The two Captains stared at him in astonishment. 'That's impossible.'
growled Dymond. The Doctor beamed. I like doing impossible things.'

With her usual air of calm superiority Romana said, 'If it's possible to get
into a situation, then it's theoretically possible to get out of it.'

'Now you've spoilt it.' said the Doctor reproachfully.
Romana ignored him. 'At the time of the collision, this ship was partially

dematerialised. Therefore, if we can create the same conditions, the ships can be
separated again. It's just a matter of exciting the molecules. Put your ship on to
full thrust, then throw it into full reverse. It's worked before, you know.'

The Doctor sighed. 'It was more fun when it 'seemed impossible!'
Thoughtfully Rigg scratched his balding head. It might work ...' He went

over to the console and began stabbing at controls. 'If I could get any power-
which I can't. The collision must have damaged the power circuits.'

The Doctor looked over his shoulder. 'Are you sure you're pressing the right
buttons?' 'Well, of course I am!'

The Doctor rubbed his chin. The Empress was powered by old-fashioned
atomic motors. For safety reasons, her main power unit would be in another part
of the ship, operated from the bridge by remote control 'Can you switch on direct
from the power unit?'

'We could - but it's dangerous. We don't really know the full extent of the
damage yet.'

Dymond said eagerly, .'It'd be worth a try. Anything's better than being
stuck here.' It was clear that Dymond was very anxious to be on his way.

It could damage your ship.' warned Rigg.
'That's rich - coming from the man who just crashed into mel'
'Now see here, Captain Dymond -'
The Doctor interrupted them both. 'All right, all right! Where's the main

power unit? In the stern?'
Rigg nodded. 'Secker will show you. Secker !'
Forgotten until now, the young navigator came forward. Romana noticed

that he was pale and sweating, presumably from reaction after the crash.
'Secker, take the Doctor to the power unit,' ordered Rigg.
Secker nodded without speaking and headed for the door. The Doctor

followed him, K9 at his heels. Romana made to join them, but the Doctor shook
his head. 'It's all right, Romana, we can manage. Why don't you stay here and
keep an eye on things.'

Secker had already left the control room and, before Romana could object,
the Doctor hurried after him.

Although she didn't show it, Romana was quietly furious at being left
behind. Presumably the Doctor was just trying to keep her out of danger - or
perhaps he wanted all the credit of being a miracle-worker for himself. There
was a broad streak of childish vanity in the Doctor's character, decided Romana.

It soon became clear that she wasn't wanted in toe control room either. With
forced politeness Captain Rigg said 'Well now, Miss - er - Romana, I've got



work to do. Why don't you and Captain Dymond go and wait in the VIP lounge?
There's a very interesting chap called Professor Tryst in there at the moment,
some kind of interplanetary zoologist, I'm sure you'd enjoy talking to him. He's
got a fascinating gadget called the CET machine - uses it for collecting
specimens. I'm sure he'll be glad to show it to you.'

Romana didn't particularly want to chat to some wandering animal
collector, but she nodded resignedly. 'Very well.'

Rigg sprang up and ushered them to the door. 'Just down the main corridor
and to the right, you can't miss it.'

Alone in the control room, Rigg went over to the computer console and
punched up an information code. After a few moments computerised lettering
appeared on the read-out screen. 'GALACTIC SALVAGE: FORMED
LONDON EARTH 2068, COMPANY CEASED TRADING 2096'.

Rigg smiled grimly. Just as he'd suspected, this mysterious Doctor wasn't
what he pretended to be. The question was, what was he really up to?

Secker led the Doctor and K9 through the long corridors of the Empress.
There was an air of old-fashioned calm and luxury about the great space cruiser.
The broad corridors were softly carpeted, their walls draped in soothing, pastel
fabrics. It was hard to realise that the whole ship was in imminent danger of
destruction. If the unstable linkage between the two space craft gave way, both
ships would be reduced to metallic fragments drifting in space.

Secker halted at a junction, where the main corridor gave way to a narrower,
more workmanlike passage. 'You go down there to section five, left into the
shuttle bay and then down into level B. You can't miss it.'

The Doctor looked curiously at him. Secker now looked very ill indeed. He
was pale and trembling, and the muscle under one eye had developed a nervous
twitch. I thought your Captain ordered you to take me to the power unit?'

I've told you where it is, haven't I? What's the difference? I've got other
things to do. I'm very busy... '

Abruptly Secker swung round and ran back the way they had come.
The Doctor looked thoughtfully after him. 'There's something odd about

that young man's behaviour, K9. I think we'd better see what he's up to.'
'Affirmative, Master.'
Secker was just disappearing down the corridor and the Doctor hurried after

him, K9 gliding at his heels.
Secker led them down a side corridor into a plainer, more functional-

looking area of the ship. He was hurrying along with a kind of jerky speed, head
down, obviously too preoccupied to think that he might be followed. Eventually
he disappeared through an open doorway over which was written 'LUGGAGE
SECTION'.

Cautiously the Doctor and K9 slipped through the doorway after him. They
found themselves in a long, dimly lit room lined with storage racks which held
boxes, crates, and bags of every imaginable description. At the far end of the
room was a row of lockers, and Secker hurried up to them. Pausing by one of
the lockers, he produced an electronic key. There was a faint beep, and the top
drawer of the locker slid open. Secker plunged his hand inside, took something
out and slumped against the locker as if in relief. Then he slammed the drawer
shut and turned away.



Hastily the Doctor and K9 ducked behind a luggage rack. Secker rushed
straight past them and disappeared down the corridor. The Doctor waited a
moment and then moved down to the row of lockers. Fishing out his sonic
screwdriver, he made a quick adjustment and then held it to the drawer of the
end locker. With a faint beep, the drawer slid open, and the Doctor peered inside.
At first sight the drawer seemed empty. Then he saw a small plastic phial lying
in the corner. He took it out and examined it. The phial was filled with greyish
powder, rather like a fine grey ash.

The Doctor unstoppered the phial, sniffed it cautiously and frowned.
Kneeling down, he held the phial out to K9. 'See what you can make of this,
old chap.'

K9 extruded a sensor aerial, as if sniffing the phial. There was a brief
whirring and clicking, then he announced, 'Substance is organic residue, heavily
impregnated with a drug commonly known as Vraxoin. This drug is highly
addictive and extremely dangerous.'

The Doctor caught his breath in horror. 'Vraxoin!' Hastily he re-stoppered
the phial. I've seen whole communities, whole planets, destroyed by this stuff.
It induces a state of warm complacency, a kind of total, idiotic happiness. When
it wears off there are the most agonising withdrawal symptoms. So you take
another dose, the cycle repeats itself and soon you're dead!' The Doctor stuffed
the phial in his pocket and hurried out of the luggage area.

The VIP lounge was one of the most luxurious parts of the ship, brightly lit,
richly decorated, furnished with comfortable chairs and couches, and a machine
that dispensed any kind of food or drink you cared dial for.

In the centre of the room stood a strange, rather ramshackle machine, a
complex, many-sided projector with a glowing red crystal crowning its peaked
roof. Standing beside the machine was its owner, a lean, tanned, grey-haired man
called Tryst. The old-fashioned square-lensed glasses, the fussy manner, and the
clipped, slightly Germanic speech all suggested the academic, while the lean
body and the deeply tanned skin were those of a man used to outdoor life. In fact
you could deduce what Tryst was, just by looking at him, decided Romana. He
could only be some kind or archaeologist or zoologist - a scholar who spent most
of his life outdoors, on strange and dangerous planets.

A sturdy dark-haired girl in space coveralls was working on the machine.
She had been introduced as Delia, Tryst's assistant.

Tryst watched her with proprietary pride, holding forth, as he had been
doing for some time, on his own life and work.

'It has long been my ambition to be the first interplanetary zoologist to
qualify and quantify every species in our galaxy. One or two more expeditions
and I may well achieve it!'

'You've just got back from one expedition and you're already planning
another?'

Romana didn't really want to encourage Tryst to go on, but she felt obliged
to make,at least a show of interest - particularly since Dymond was sitting
slumped in a corner, a drink in his hand, not even pretending to listen.

Tryst nodded eagerly. The next expedition is always on my mind, my dear
young lady - and the next, and the next. Unfortunately it is a question of finance. I



was hoping to find a private sponsor on Azure, but this little accident has delayed
everything.'

'You're funded privately? I should have thought the Government...'
'Ah yes, the Government used to fund me, but the galactic recession put

a stop to all that. Now all they can do is provide me with free travel facilities
on Government-sponsored airlines.' He chuckled wryly. 'First-class facilities, as
you see. My machine and I always travel first class.' He patted the projector
proudly.

'What exactly is the machine? What does it do?'
'That, my dear young lady, is the Continuous Event Transmitter. The CET

machine, for short. An invention of my own. Let me show you'
GentlymovingDelia aside, Tryst got behind themachine. The crystal on top

glowed bright red as the machine was switched on. Tryst focussed the projector
on the opposite wall and suddenly the wall disappeared, to be replaced by an
arid, rocky landscape. Twin suns cast a lurid glow over the scene.

Romana smiled. 'It looks as if you've invented the magic lantern!'
Tryst sounded a little hurt. 'What you see may appear to be a mere

projection. In fact it is the projection of an actual matter transmutation?
Romana stared at the landscape. It was certainlymore than just a flat picture.

You could see right into it and she could even see little dust eddies swirling about
the rocks. 'You mean that landscape is real?'

Delia smiled, pleased by Romana's astonishment.
'In a sense, yes. You see, when we collect specimens for study they are

converted into electro-magnetic signals and stored on an event crystal, which
can be projected through the machine.'

'There are living creatures in there?'
Tryst nodded proudly. 'Oh yes. And they go on living and evolving in the

crystal.' Tryst held up a small crystal cube. 'The image projection enables us to
study them whenever we wish, because the flora and fauna are actually existing
in the crystal itself. I'm sure you can appreciate what a tremendous technical
achievement that is!'

Romana looked disapprovingly at him. 'I wouldn't say that. All you've
achieved is a crude form of matter transfer by dimensional control.'

'Crude?' Tryst was appalled.
'The crudest of prototypes. And you could have problems with it.'
'Problems?' spluttered Tryst. 'But it works perfectly.'
'I very much doubt that - particularly under the conditions we're in now.

We've just suffered a materialisation collision, remember, a warp smash. It's
caused all kinds of unstable matter interfaces. They'll probably affect the
dimensional matrix of your machine. Had you thought of that?'

'Young lady, are you claiming that your scientific knowledge is superior
to my own?'

Romana did her best to be tactful. 'Well, equal, shall we say?'
Dymond jumped impatiently to his feet. 'I wish you twowould stop showing

off with your scientific double-talk! When's something going to be done about
freeing my ship?'

Romana sighed and turned back to Tryst. 'All I'm saying is, the potential
instability of the matter interface... '



With a groan of protest, Dymond stalked ott to the dispenser and dialled
himself a large, stiff drink.

Captain Rigg was doing his best to explain things to ground control on
the planet Azure, without a great deal of success. 'Yes, I'm aware we've got a
serious problem, but we are doing our best to sort it out Meanwhile we'll stay in
quarantine orbit. Yes, I'll keep you fully informed. Captain Rigg out.'

Rigg flicked off the communicator and looked up the Doctor andK9 hurried
in. 'Well, well, the man from the Galactic! How are things in the power room?

'Never got there. I want to talk to you about that chap Secker.' 'What about
him?'

'He wouldn't take me to the power room - he ran away.'
Rigg tried to grapple with this new problem. 'He was behaving oddly even

before the crash. Seems to be in a different world.'
'Perhaps he is,' said the Doctor mysteriously. 'Could I have a look at your

log?' 'What for?'
'I'd like to see if he's been to any planet where he might have picked up

Vraxoin.'
Rigg looked blankly at him. 'This is a simple tourist run, Doctor. Station

nine to Azure, Azure to station nine. A straight charter for the whole tourist
season.' Like many once-great space ships, the Empress had been forced to
accept humbler work in her old age.

'What about the passengers, then? One of them could be a carrier.'
'I doubt it, Doctor. They're all thoroughly respectable citizens of Earth on a

long-awaited holiday. They've all had pre-vacation security checks, the Azuriari
authorities insist on it.' The Doctor frowned. Is there anyone else, apart from the
tourist passengers?'

'There's only Tryst. He's a zoologist. We picked him up on station nine.
He'd just finished a long expedition. Said he wanted to combine having a holiday
with looking for a sponsor.'

'And where had he been on this expedition?' Rigg shrugged. 'All over the
galaxy, as far as I can make out. But he's not carrying any drugs, Doctor. We
checked him and his assistant before we let them on board. Any drugs would
have shown up then.'

I'd still like to know where he's been!'
'And I'd still like to know who you are I'
'Me? I told you, I'm with Galactic Salvage.'
'Galactic Salvage went out of business years ago.'
The Doctor looked surprised. 'They did? I wondered why I hadn't been paid

recently.'
'That's not good enough, Doctor.'
'That's what I thought,' agreed the Doctor. 'Where do I find this chap Tryst?'
'In the VIP lounge.'
'See if you can find Secker, then meet me there in five minutes.'
Rigg jumped up. 'Look here, Doctor, you still haven't answered'-'
'Do you want this ship freed or not?' asked the Doctor severely.
'Well, of course I do.'
'Then meet me in the lounge in five minutes'.'
Before Rigg could protest further, the Doctor was gone.



As Secker strolled vaguely along the corridors of the Empress, it seemed
that he floated cloudlike along a velvet tunnel flecked with gleaming jewels
towards some wonderful destination. The only thing to spoil his pleasure was a
persistent voice nagging at him. It was calling his name.

'Navigator Secker, blared the metallic voice. 'Navigator Secker will report
to the bridge immediately.

Secker giggled foolishly and drifted on.
He became aware that the corridor ahead of him ended abruptly in an area

that looked strangely like frozen fog. And there was something else, a kind of
blue mist that drifted through the grey fog, inter-iningling with it.

It was all very interesting. Ignoring the still-blaring voice, Secker wandered
into the mist.

It swallowed him up.



3. The Attack

'Go on,' said the Doctor, 'Where did you go next?'
Tryst leaned forward eagerly, delighted by the Doctor's flattering interest

in his travels.
'We went through the Sigmus Gap and over to System M Three-Seven. It's

a small system, only three planets, but one of them supports life in a very early
I stage of evolution - molluscs, algae, a few primitive insects. Here, I can show
you. Delia, get me the M Three-Seven crystal.'

Delia reached for a rack holding the crystals, but the Doctor held up his
hand. 'No, no, please don't trouble yourself. I'm more interested in the voyage
itself, the planets you've visited. It's really quite fascinating.'

Tryst took a slim leather-bound volume from a nearby table. 'Here you are,
Doctor! The Log of the Volante't a full record of all my voyages. I had it published
to go with my lectures. The Volatile was my ship.'

The Doctor flicked through the log, page by page. 'Fascinating, quite
fascinating!' He got up and wandered over to the CET machine. 'And you
invented this device to collect your specimens? I once knew a scientist who was
working on a device like this - a Professor Stein.'

'You knew Professor Stein? He was my closest colleague. We worked on
the idea together and I completed the device after his death. Did you know him
well?'

'Only by reputation. I once attended his seminar on - '
Dymond said impatiently, 'This scientific reminiscence is all very

fascinating, Doctor, but don't we have more important things to do? I thought
you were going to help separate the ships. I'm very anxious to be on my way. I
hadn't really been expecting a Space liner to materialise around my ship today.'

Before the Doctor could reply, Captain Rigg hurried into the lounge. 1 can't
locate Secker anywhere, Doctor. I've called him on the intercom all over the ship.
Now I've got men out looking for him.'

'I see. Then you'll have to take me down to the power unit yourself, won't
you?'

'Very well.'
'Let's be on our way, shall we?' The Doctor turned to Tryst. 'I've enjoyed

our chat. We must have a little discussion about that machine of yours sometime
-and about the ethics of capturing alien species for your own private zoo.'

Tryst was taken aback. 'Zoo, Doctor? I am engaged in important scientific
research, helping to conserve endangered species.'

The Doctor nodded towards the CET machine. 'By putting them in that
thing? You're conserving them the way a jam maker conserves raspberries!
Come along, Captain.'

As the Doctor left, followed by Rigg and K9, Romana turned to Tryst. 'You
mustn't mind the Doctor. He just likes to irritate people.'

'Well, he has a right to his opinion, I suppose.' said Tryst huffily. 'Still, it's
nice to have someone of reasonable intellect to talk to again.' He smiled at Delia



and patted her arm. 'No disrespect, my dear, but after such a long voyage cooped
up with the same people...

'How many were on your expedition?' asked Romana.
'Just Delia and myself. There were three of us to begin with, but we... lost

one. He died.'
Romana saw Delia wince.
Tryst seemed to be staring into the past, reliving some horrible event.
'How did he die?' asked Romana.
'He... died.' repeated Tryst, and turned away.
Rigg took the Doctor and K9 along the service corridors of the Empfess,

towards the power bay. 'Did you learn anything from Professor Tryst, Doctor?'
'No. I checked through all the planets he'd visited. None of them was a

known source of Vraxoin. Though mind you .. '
'What?'
'It cropped up on various planets, but it always turned out to have been

smuggled in from somewhere else. No one ever discovered where it originated
from - or how to make it, come to that.'

'It's a drug, isn't it? Surely it can be copied artificially?'
'Some very eminent scientists tried, when they were looking for a cure for

Vraxoin addiction. Vraxoin seems to be a mixture of animal and vegetable
elements combined in some unique way. So if someone's found out where it
comes from, or how to make it...'

'He could make a colossal fortune.' said Rigg slowly.
'That's right. And ruin a colossal number of lives in the process - oh dear!'
They turned a corner and found themselves facing awall of frozen fog. They

had reached a point where the two ships joined. K9 glided forward, extruding
his antennae. 'Caution. Area of overlap is highly dangerous. Molecular structure
of the two ships is incompatible, causing unstable matter interface.'

The Doctor studied the strange blurred area, 'Fascinating. The ships are
rejecting each other -molecularly that is.'

Rigg struggled to understand. 'Like a tissue transplant, you mean?'
'Exactly. At the moment there's a kind of precarious balance, but if it tips

one way or the other... Tell me, is there another way to the power unit?'
'We could try from below the shuttle bay. We'd have to cut through a wall,

but it's fairly thin there. I'll get hold of some lasers.'
The Doctor smiled. 'Don't bother - I've got my own equipment!'
He bent down and patted K9.
Left, alone in the VIP lounge, Romana wandered over to the CET machine

and switched it on. Immediately the wall in front of the machine disappeared,
to be replaced by an arid, rocky landscape so real that it looked as if you could
walk into it. She flicked the selector switch, and a bare, windy plain replaced the
rocks. Next came a forest with a glimpse of a ruined city.

The next projection was of a dense tropical jungle with thick-boled trees,
waving palm-fronds, dangling pnes and creepers, and a riot of assorted greenery
Struggling towards the light of a lurid orange sky. The canopy of vegetation was
so thick that it was dark and shadowy between the tree trunks. Romana had an
uneasy feeling that things were moving in those shadows. Certainly there was



life in the jungle - a weird assortment of squawks, growls and hisses bore witness
to that.

There was something curiously hypnotic about the jungle scene. Romana
found herself drawn closer and closer to the projection. She had a strange
sensation that there was someone in the picture, watching her, a shadowy figure
half-hidden behind one of the trees. Romana took a step nearer - and a voice
behind her said sharply. 'What are you doing?'

It was Delia, Tryst's assistant.
'I was just having a look,' said Romana vaguely. 'I hope you don't mind?'
Delia went over to the machine and switched it off. 'I don't mind, no.'
'Then why switch it off?'
'Because Professor Tryst would mind very much indeed. This machine's his

pride and joy. Nobody touches it except him.'
'Has it ever gone wrong?'
'No, why should it?'
Romana studied the machine. 'Lots of reasons. It really is a very primitive

device. Could I just see a little more of that last projection?'
'Eden?' said Delia sharply. 'No, I'd rather you didn't, if you don't mind.'
'Why not? What's the matter?'
'It's just that Eden brings back very unpleasant memories. That was where

we lost Stott, the third member of the crew.'
'Was he a close friend of yours?'
'More than a friend,' said Delia quietly. 'Still, it doesn't matter now. If you'll

excuse me?' Obviously near to tears, Delia rushed from the room.
The Doctor, Rigg and K9 went along more corridors, down in a service lift,

along more corridors, only to find themselves facing the frozen fog barrier once
again.

Rigg sighed. 'We'll have to try another route, Doctor. The place to cut
through is beyond this overlap.'

'Whereabouts is the power unit from here?'
Rigg pointed to the ceiling. 'Up there. We'll have to - '
A blood-curdling scream came from somewhere within the fog.
'Come on,' shouted Rigg and dashed forwards, the Doctor close behind him.
'Caution, Master,' called K9. 'You are entering a matter interface!'
They found themselves in a strange unearthly region, where not only vision

but time and motion were blurred as well. It was if they were struggling in some
kind of dreamlike slow-motion.

The Doctor stumbled over something soft, moving-a human body. 'Here,
Rigg,' he yelled. 'We've got to get him out!'

They bent down, grabbed the body and, with a mighty effort, dragged it out
of the interface and back into the corridor.

Gasping Rigg looked down - and saw that they had found the missing
Secker. His clothes were ripped and torn as if by savage claws, and blood oozed
from deep gashes in his chest and neck.

Rigg snatched out his communicator. 'Emergency medical team to service
lift seven, level four. I'll meet you by the lift. Move.' He flicked off the
communicator. 'Give me a hand with him, will you, Doctor?'



The Doctor took Secker's shoulders, while Rigg lifted his feet. As they
carried the body away the Doctor called, 'Take a look in there K9, see if you
can find anything.'

'The mist is a matter interface, and therefore dangerous,' protested K9.
The Doctor sighed. You couldn't expect an automaton to take illogical risks.

'All right, K9, just go to the edge'
'Affirmative, Master.'
K9 nosed his way cautiously up to the edge of the fog and even ventured a

few inches inside. Immediately he felt that same disorientation that had affected
the Doctor and Rigg. 'Sensors will not function in this environment, Master.
Expedition useless.'

By the time they reached the lift, a medical team was waiting for them.
Rigg helped them to lift Secker's body on to the stretcher. 'Get him to sickbay,
right away.'

The medics carried the stretcher into the lift, Rigg followed them, and the
doors closed.

Left on his own, the Doctor stood thinking hard for a moment. He knew
now what had happened to Secker - but what about Secker's supply of Vraxoin.
He turned and hurried back the way he had come.

The luggage compartment was still dark and shadowy as the Doctor
approached - but this time it wasn't empty. A figure was hunched over Secker's
locker. At the sound of the Doctor's footsteps, the figure darted back into the
shadows.

The Doctor strode into the room and looked around. He went down the
room towards the locker, found the open drawer and peered inside. It was empty.

The Doctor stared down at the drawer, rubbing his chin. He had arrived too
late - but at least he knew that Secker had a confederate in his drug smuggling.
Someone else on the ship was involved as well - and that someone had lost no
time in getting hold of Seeker's supply of Vraxoin. But where was Seeker's
accomplice now?

A shuffling movement in the shadows made the Doctor realise that the one
he was seeking could be risht behind him. The Doctor spun round and saw a
glimpse of a goggled, space-coveralled figure holding, a blaster.

the Dboctor backed away, talking frantically to gain time. 'Hullol Now,
please don't do anything hasty. I'm sure we can talk this over -

The Doctor was planning to hurl himself aside, but he left it too late. The
blaster fired, catching him full in its energy-beam. TheDoctor writhed, staggered
and pitched headlong to the floor. Stooping over Doctor's huddled body, the
shadowy figure searched quickly through his pockets, found the remaining phial
of Vraxoin, and hurried from the room.



4. Monster in the Fog

There was an ante-room to the Empress's sickbay, a small, comfortably
furnished area, with a window giving on to the operating theatre itself. Rigg
was gazing through that window now, watching a team of medics working on
Seeker's unconscious body, cleaning and sealing the terrible wounds, giving an
emergency blood transfusion, using everything that medical skills and up-to-
date equipment could provide to preserve the weakly flickering life. Something
about the desperate urgency of their movements told Rigg that it wasn't going
to be enough.

As he turned away, Delia and Tryst huitied into the room. Delia glanced
through the window, and looked hurriedly away. 'We got your message, Captain.
What happened to him?'

'Somebody - or something - attacked him.'
'It's horrible,' said Delia. 'Why was he attacked?'
'I don't know.' growled Rigg.
'It's a terrible business, of course,' said Tryst fussily. 'But I fail to see why

this problem concerns us.'
'Then take a look through there, Professor. Look at those wounds.'
Tryst went over to the window and looked through at the silent figure on

the operating table. He studied it for a moment, his face impassive. 'Where did
this happen?'

'Below the shuttle bay - he seems to have wandered into one of the matter
interfaces.'

Tryst turned away from the window. 'Then thats the answer. Who knows
what energy-forces may in such an unstable zone?'

'You saw the marks on the body.' said Rigg steadily. 'They look to me as
if they were made by claws. You didn't bring any live specimens on board my
ship, did you, Professor?'

'No, Captain, I did not. I can assure you all my specimens are in the form
of laser crystal recordings and are utterly harmless.'

'They'd better be.'
A white-coated figure came through the door of the operating room. Rigg

looked up eagerly. 'Well?'
The medic shook his head. 'We were too late. He'd lost too much blood.' He

paused. 'We might have been able to save him in spite of that - but his system
appears to have been weakened by some kind of addictive drug.'

Tired of waiting for the Doctor, Romana went to look for him and ran into
K9, who was on precisely the same errand, using his sensors to detect the
Doctor's whereabouts.

As they moved along the corridor to the luggage room, K9 said, 'This way,
Mistress. Detection ot Doctor's presence now confirmed.'

'How far away?'
'Approximately seven metres and closing.
He led her along the corridor, into the luggage area and straight up to the

Doctors unconscious body.



Romana knelt beside him. 'Doctor!'
She shook him gently. The doctor moaned and stirred. Relieved to find him

alive, Romanna said, 'Doctor, wake up! What happened to you?'
The doctor sat up and groaned, clutching his aching head. 'I was

bushwacked'
Romana didn't know what he was talking about. 'You were what?'
Neither did K9. 'Expression unfamiliar. Please repeat.'
The Doctor groaned and struggled to his feet. 'Bushwacked,' he repeated

indignantly.
K9 whirred and clicked as he searched through his data banks.

'Bushwacked!' he announced with a beep of satisfaction. 'The Doctor has been
the victim of a cowardly attack by person or persons unknown.

The Doctor reached into the pocket where he'd put the phial of Vraxoin.
'It's gone!

'Something stolen?* asked Romana.
'Some Vraxoin I found. Someone aboard this ship is smuggling drugs.'
'Vraxoin!' Romana was horrified. 'I thought that had been stamped out long

ago. Only - they never found the source, did they??'
No, they didn't. The secret was supposed to have died with the last of the

smugglers. Now it looks as if someone's rediscovered it.'
Dymond was pacing up and down impatiently. 'Well, where is this Doctor

then? He comes up with a marvellous idea to separate the ships, fiddles about
endlessly, and now he's disappeared!'

'Don't tell me your troubles.' said Rigg sourly. 'I've got problems of my own
- including a dead navigator. The Doctor's going to cut his way into the power
room - which means I'll have a gaping hole in my ship to explain.'

'Well, whatever he's going to do, I wish he'd get on with it,' grumbled
Dymond. I've got a schedule to keep, you know!'

'So have I,' Snarled Rigg, and marched out of the contorl room.
The Doctor Romana and K9 were walking along the corridor from the

luggage area. As they reached the lift, Romana said, 'Doctor, that machine of
Tryst's the CET machine.'

'What about it?'
'It doesn't just take three-dimensional recordings,! does it?'
The Doctor said, 'No, it doesn't. The animals themselves are converted into

magnetic signals, together with their surrounding habitats.'
'So he's left bare patches on all the planets he's visited?'
'That's right. The CETmachine is nomore than an electronic zoo. For cages,

read laser crystals. Either I way, the animals are trapped inside.'
'Are we sure of that, Doctor?'
'What do you mean?'
'Well, you saw how primitive that device was. Now that the ship is full

of these unstable matter zones... The whole thing gives me the creeps. Suppose
something got out of the machine and attacked Seeker?'

'KilledSeeker,' corrected a grim voice behind them. 'He's dead, they couldn't
save him.' Rigg had come up behind them.

'Pity', said the Doctor thoughtfully. 'He might have been able to tell us what
attacked him. You've no idea what it was?'



Rigg shook his head. 'I had a word with Tryst, but he couldn't help either.
He swears that machine of his is perfectly safe.'

'Oh, does he? I think you'd better go and take a look at it, Romana. If you're
not convinced it's safe, close it down.'

'What are you going to do?'
'Separate the ships - I hope! Come along, Captain, let's try and work our

way round to the power unit.'
The VIP lounge was empty when Romana appeared. Thankful she wouldn't

have to argue with Tryst, she went over to the CET machine and switched it on.
Once again the sinisterly beautiful jungle landscape of the planet called

Eden replaced the opposite wall. It seemed later now and the orange sky was
darkening. The croaking of some frog-like nocturnal creatures mingled with the
other sounds of the jungle. As Romana stared in fascination, the landscape
seemed to exert a hypnotic power, drawing her closer and closer.

It seemed almost as if by taking a few more steps she would actually be
inside the jungle. Though that was ridiculous, of course. The scene before her
was only a three-dimensional projection of the miniaturised landscape inside the
laser crystal.

Suddenly, astonishingly, a bright-winged insect like a jewelled moth,
fluttered out of the projection and touched her neck.

Romana felt the tiniest of pricks, and sudden drowsiness flooded over her.
A tide of darkness swept up and overwhelmed her, and she sank unconscious
to the floor.

The jewelled creature fluttered about the lounge for a moment or two, then
vanished back inside the projection.

Romana lay still as death on the floor. Above her the night-scape of Eden
grew steadily darker. Somewhere in the dense vegetation, something moved...

After much travelling along corridors and through service tunnels, Rigg
came to a halt before a ribbed steel bulkhead. 'Here you are, Doctor, this is the
best we can da We could go further along, but I don't want to damage the air
seal, or weaken the hull by cutting through a stress-point.'

'I'm sure K9 will be careful.' said the Doctor soothingly. 'Won't you, K9?'
'Affirmative, Master!' K9 scanned the steel wall ahead of him. 'Sensors

indicate that this would be a most suitable section.'
'Good. Make the gap as big as you can without weakening the hull, will

you?'
'Affirmative, Master,' said K9 again. 'The aperturq will be 4.63 square

metres in size.'
Rigg looked on in astonishment as K9 extruded his blaster, concentrated

the beam, and began cutting a fine line through the steel of the bulkhead. 'Very
handy, that machine of yours, Doctor.'

'Machine? K9's much more than a mere machine. He's saved my life on
many occasions. He even beat me at chess - once!'

The Doctor and Rigg watched K9 cut a window-shaped opening in the steel
bulkhead. When the four sides of the oblong were complete, K9 glided to one
side. 'The panel is free, Master. It needs only to be lifted away.'

'Right, Doctor, give me a hand,' said Riggj eagerly.



Grasping the ribbed steel projections, the Doctor and Rigg lifted the loose
section and lowered it to the ground.

A large, oblong gap was left in the bulkhead. But there was no power unit
to be seen on the other side.

Instead the gap was filled with a blue mist, not frozen .but swirling eerily.
The Doctor moved forward in fascination. 'We seem to have cut into an

interface ...'
Suddenly a burning-eyed monster lurched out of the fog, growling

ferociously and slashing at him with savage claws.



5. Drugged

With a yell of alarm, the Doctor sprang back.
Luckily for him, the monster was a good deal bigger than the gap, so much

so that only its head and shoulders could get through.
Safe, at least for the moment, the Doctor had time to study the creature.

The boar-like head had a curiously flattened nose-structure; the huge bulging
eyes were a luminous green; and the creature was covered with thick, shaggy
fur. Most terrifying of all were the rows of drooling fangs and the massive paws
ending in razor-sharp claws. It was all too clear what had caused those terrible
wounds on Seeker's body.

The monster gave a savage roar and made a determined effort to squeeze
the rest of itself through the gap. The Doctor decided to defer further scientific
study and shouted, 'K9! Quick, K9!' Raising his head, K9 fired a rapid blast. The
monster gave a scream of rage and pain, and disappeared backwards through
the gap.

'What the devil was that, Doctor?' asked Rigg amazedly.
'I haven't the slightest idea!'
'And how, in the name of all the suns, did it get onto my ship? First this

freak collision, now there's a monster roaming about. The whole thing's totally
inexplicable.'

'Nonsense. Nothing's inexplicable.' said the Doctor firmly.
'Then how do you explain it?' The Doctor thought hard, then shrugged. 'I

can't.
For the moment at least, it seems to be - inexplicable! Come on, we'd better

put the panel back. I'm afraid ou'll have to reweld it, K9.'
The Doctor and Rigg lifted the panel back in place. K9 extruded his laser

and began rewelding the panel he had just cut away.
'Did you see those claws?' asked Rigg with a shudder. 'That must be what

killed Seeker.'
'It seems very probable. Though as a matter of fact, Seeker was as good as

dead already.'
'What do you mean?'
'Seeker was taking Vraxoin.' The Doctor looked hard at Rigg, studying his

reaction.
Rigg gave a gasp of what looked like quite genuine horror. 'The medic said

his system had been weakened by some drug ... So that's why he died.'
'That's right. And unless we find out what's going on here, a lot of other

people will die as well.'
Leaving K9 to finish his welding job, the Doctor and Rigg made their way

back to the bridge.
Rigg was still brooding over the Doctor's news. 'None of my passengers

could have brought Vraxoin on board, I can promise you that.'
'What about the other ship - Captain Dymond's survey vessel?'
'We can soon find out. I'll check it with the scanners, I'll re-scan this ship

as well. We've got to find that Vrax, Doctor, it's bad stuff.'



'Bad stuff?' said the Doctor, apalled. It's the worst! I've seen whole planets
ruined by Vraxoin - while the smugglers made a fortune.'

Rigg nodded shrewdly. 'Your people knew it would he on board, did they?'
'My people?'
'Come on, Doctor, I know who you are now. You're a narc'
A what?'
'You're working for the Intergalactic Narcotics Bureau.'
'No, I'm not, I'm just the Doctor. I don't work for anybody.'
Rigg shrugged. 'All right, have it your way. But everybody works for

somebody.'
It was clear that Rigg was far from convinced by the Doctor's denials. The

Doctor opened his mouth to protest further, and then closed it again. It was as
good a role as any, and perhaps it would be easier to let Rigg go on thinking he
was some kind of Intergalactic Secret Agent.

They went into the control room and Rigg marched straight over to the
scanner screen. The Doctor watched as he flashed up one computerised diagram
after another: first a general view of the two ships locked together; then more
detailed charts of each ship, section by section.

Finally Rigg switched off the scanner and sat back. 'Well, that's it, Doctor.
There's no Vrax on board my ship - or on Dymond's either.'

'You've checked the whole of both ships?' You saw me. Every nook and
cranny.'

'Seeker kept his supply in a locker in the luggage section. I took what was
left out of the drawermyself then someone stunnedme and took it away fromme.

'Who?'
'Who indeed? Is there any possible defence against this scanner - some way

the Vrax could be shielded so we wouldn't find it?'
'None that I know of,' said Rigg dubiously. 'Mind you, I suppose it's

possible. But it would have to be just a very small quantity of the stuff. Listen,
Doctor, I know this smuggling's a very serious business, but it isn't really the
most pressing of my problems.'

'You want to get the ships separated?'
'Yes, Doctor.' said Rigg patiently. 'But how are we going to do it, if we can't

get through to the power unit?'
There might be a way,' said the Doctor thoughtfolly. If we used my ship.'
'Your ship? Where is your ship anyway?'
'Oh, around.' said the Doctor vaguely.
Rigg gave him a suspicious look. 'There you go again - more mysteries.

How do I know I can trust you?'
'Or I you?'
'That's hardly the point.'
'Isn't it? Who's helping whom?'
Rigg sighed, defeated. 'All right, Doctor, what do you want me to do?'
'Stay here until you hear from me. Then when I give the word, get Dymond

to put his ship on full power.'
Rigg started to object. The Doctor said, 'Just trust me, Captain.' and hurried

from the control room.



Romana lay unconcious on the floor of the VIP lounge. Sombody stood
looking down at her - somebody who found Romana's presence a problem, and
was wondering what to do about it. At the sound of footsteps in the corridore
outside, the somebody ducked into the alcove that held the food-and-drink
dispenser.

Delia came into the room, saw Romana stretched out and knelt at her side.
'Romana! Romana are you all right?'

Romana opened her eyes. 'I don't know.' She struggled into a sitting
position. 'Yes, I think so.'

Delia helped her to her feet and led her over to the couch. 'What happened?'
I'm not sure, I must have fainted. No, wait a minute...' Romana touched a

finger to a tiny sore spot on her neck. 'Something came out of the picture and
touched my neck. A kind of jewelled insect.'

Delia's eyes widened. 'A somno-moth!'
'What?'
'There's something we called a somno-moth on Eden. It renders its victims

unconscious with a mild narcotic, then takes a drop or two of blood. Harmless
really, more of a nuisance than anything else.' Delia shook her head decisively.
'But that's ridiculous,' she went on. 'There's no way that the moth could have got
out of the projection.'

'I was certainly watching the Eden projection when it happened.' Romana
looked at the wall. 'It isn't on any more. Did you switch it off?'

'No, it was off when I came in. I asked you not to put the Eden projection
on any more.'

'You said you didn't like to see it,' corrected Romana. 'Since I was alone, I
thought I'd take another look. Besides, you assumed me the machine was
perfectly safe, didn't you? Is'it safe?'

'Of course it is,' Delia jumped to her feet. 'Let me get you something to
drink, you still look quite pale.'

Delia hurried over to the dispenser, studied thei computerised controls and
dialled. The machine ejected a plasti-crystal tumbler, and filled it with a
sparkling golden fluid.

Captain Rigg came into the VIP lounge and hurried over to the despenser.
'That looks good Della. What is it?'

Delia turned. 'Just a fruit cordial. Its for Romana, she fainted.'
'Fainted? What's the matter with her?'
'Oh, nothing,' said Delia quickly. 'Warp sickness probably. She's all right

now.'
While they were talking, a hand came from behind the dispenser, tipped a

phial of grey powder into the cordial, and disappeared behind the machine. The
fine grey powder dissolved instantly, leaving no trace.

'Can I dial you a drink, Captain?' asked Delia.
I'm in a bit of a rush, actually, Delia. Mind if I just take this one?' Without

waiting for a reply, Rigg picked up the tumbler and hurried out.
Delia turned back to the machine, pressed the repeat button, and watched as

the dispenser produced another tumbler and filled it up. She picked up the glass
of cordial and carried it over to Romana.



K9 waited patiently outside the TARDIS until the Doctor emerged carrying
a piece of equipment that looked very like a kind of laser cannon. In fact it was
part of the dematerialisation circuit of the TARDIS. A long lead trailed from the
demat gun back into the TARDIS itself.

The Doctor set up the contraption in the corridor, aiming it carefully at the
wall as if lining up on an invisible target.

K9 stood watching, his head cocked sceptically. 'I predict only sixty per
cent chance of success for this scheme, Master.'

The Doctor straightened up. 'Why do you always have to look on the black
side, K9? Here I am trying to solve the problem with a brilliant bit of lateral
thinking, and you have to spoil things with logic. If we use the TARDIS to boost
the dematerialisation process-'

Localised power is liable to be deficient, owing to damage to power units.'
said K9 dogmatically.

'That's why we may need to use the TARDIS dematerialisation circuits as
a booster.'

'Scheme is unprecedented and extremely hazardous. I can predict ...'
'Yes, I know, sixty per cent! I still think it's worth a try. So stop grumbling,

K9. Let's go and find Romana, and tell her what's going on.'
Captain Dymond's face glared indignantly out of the visi-screen on the

Empress's bridge. 'How much longer, Captain Rigg? I've got to be away soon,
or I'll lose my contract. I hope you realise, that this is all your fault? You were,
the one who was off course.'

Rigg took a sip of his cordial and grinned at Tryst, who stood looking
curiously over his shoulder. 'What if I was? You shouldn't even have been in
the same sector!'

'Please, gentlemen,' said Tryst diplomatically. 'Blaming each other will help
no one. Since the Doctor is the only one with a constructive plan, you must do
all you can to help him.'

Rigg yawned. The strangest feeling of well-being was flooding over him.
Despite the crisis, he felt that everything was really all right, couldn't be better
infact. 'The Doctor,' he jeered. 'What do we know about him, eh? He's got some
bee in his bonnet about drug smuggling! I ask you - drug smuggling - on my ship'

'The Doctor really has such suspicions?'
'Yes, and that's all they are. Suspicions!' said Rigg truculently. 'No evidence,

no evidence at all. Not a trace of drugs anywhere on my ship, or on Dymond's.'
Rigg drained his cordial. 'So that's the least of our worries

His voice was becoming slightly slurred.
'The least of our worries,' he repeated and slouched back in his seat.
Tryst looked at him in sudden alarm. There was Something very wrongwith

Captain Rigg.



6. The Fugitive

The Doctor, watched by a now-recovered Romana. was examining the CET
machine. 'And you're sure that the insect that attacked you came out of the
projection?'

'Quite sure.'
'And so did the thing that killed Seeker. You were right about this machine,

Romana, it is unstable. Both of those creatures escaped from this electronic zoo
here. I wonder which projection they came from?' 'The insect came from a planet
called Eden -' said Romana. She broke off as Tryst came into the lounge. He
frowned as he saw the Doctor examining his beloved machine, but managed to
change his expression to a rather unconvincing smile. 'Ah, there you are, Doctor
I'm delighted that you take such an interest in my CET machine.

'I find it absolutely amazing,' said the Doctor solemnly.
'It is rather impressive, isn't it?'
The Doctor's voice hardened. 'I find it amazing that you go on using a

machine like this when it's so primitive. The whole thing's utterly unstable.'
'Naturally you have a right to your opinion, Doctor, said Tryst stiffly.
'I have a right to go on living too - and this machinemakesme very nervous.'
'But what do you think is so wrong? Which parts are unreliable?'
The Doctor took a deep breath. 'Well, at a lough guess I'd say the spatial

integrator, the transmuta-fional oscillator, the hologistic retention circuit ... need
I go on? And as for the dimensional osmosis damper ..

'The dimen-what?'
The Doctor was horrified. 'You mean you haven't even got a dimensional

osmosis damper? Professor, you don't realize what dangers ..
'Personally I feel that you are exaggerating, Doctor.' said Tryst. 'However,

I've decided to turn off the machine and I shan't use it again until I've made a
full check. I'll close it down right away.'

'I'm very glad to hear you say that.'
'By the way, I have a message for you, Doctor. They are ready to begin the

separation of the ships. Captain Dymond and Captain Rigg are waiting for you.'
The Doctor headed for the door. I'm on my way. Come on, Romana, I'll

need you in the TARDIS to operate the demat controls. Don't forget to switch
that machine off, Professor Tryst!'

The Doctor and Romana hurried out, K9 gliding behind them.
Tryst watched them go, then turned back to his CET machine. Finally he

reached out and turned it off, watching sadly as the glowing red crystal went dark.
'You know what, Dymond?' said Rigg suddenly. 'My Empress has eaten

your little ship. Swallowed it up!' He giggled.
Dymond scowled angrily from the screen. 'I don't see why you find it so

funny. You could lose your captaincy over this.'
Rigg laughed, 'I know! That's what's so funny!'
The Doctor and K9 came onto the bridge. 'Ready! to try again, everyone?'

He looked at the visi-screen. 'Captain Dymond, I want you to be ready to put
your ship on full thrust the minute I give the word.'



'All right, Doctor, I'm ready.'
Rigg smiled as if the whole thing was some enormous joke. 'And where

will you be, Doctor?'
'Here, if that's all right with you. Romana's in my ship, so I can direct the

operation from here.'
Rigg waved his hands expansively. 'Certainly, Doctor, be my guest!'
'Thank you.' Taking Rigg at his word, the Doctor leaned forward and

stabbed controls on the communication unit. Romana's face appeared on another
monitor screen. 'Everything ready, Romana?'

'Ready, Doctor.'
'Good, then we're only waiting for Dymond. K9?'
'Master?'
'Maybe you'd better go and monitor the operation from one of the matter

interfaces.'
'Affirmative, Master.' Obediently K9 glided out -but as he left he was

muttering obstinately. 'Probability of success only sixty per cent, owing to
deficiency in localised energy sources .. .'

Dymond's face reappeared on the screen. 'I've run up the engines ready
when you are, Doctor.'

'Right, Captain Rigg, start the power build-up.'
Astonishingly Rigg said, 'Oh, you do it, Doctor. I don't feel well.' He got

up and stumbled out of the control room.
The Doctor looked after him in concern but there was no time to investigate.

He slipped into Rigg's command chair, studied the controls, then began running
up the power. 'All right, Romana, stand by...'

K9 glided along the corridors until he reached a barrier of frozen fog, the
matter interface where the realities of the two ships merged. He could hear the
throbbing of the ship's engines.

Suddenly the fog cleared and the corridor ahead became normal. It seemed
that the Doctor's scheme had worked - the ships were separating. Sensors alert
K9 glided cautiously forward.

Suddenly fog began forming around him as the freak conditions reasserted
themselves. K9 was trapped in an unstable zone. It was too far to go back, but
ahead there was a section of clear corridor, normal space. With a final effort K9
glided forward, and found himself on the far side of the barrier. Cautiously K9
moved forward. He was just outside a door marked 'POWER UNIT'. K9 sent
out an energy signal that triggered the remote control. The door slid open and
he went inside.

On the bridge the Doctor was shouting, 'What's the matter Dymond? Why
are you reducing power?'

'I've got to, Doctor. My whole ship's breaking up.'
'Don't lose your nerve now, man. Boost the power again. We were almost

there.'
'It's no use, Doctor. The ship won't take the stress.'
The roar of the Hecate's motors dwindled and then died away. The Doctor

switched off the Empress's power and stood up. 'Switch off the booster, will you,
Romana? I'm going to look for K9, he's taking some readings for me. If I can



work out the stress-readings, maybe we can persuade Dymond to have another
go.'

The Doctor went out of the control room and made his way to the nearest
matter interface. There was no sign of K9. He studied the blurred area
thoughtfully. 'Well, he didn't turn back, or I'd have met him on the way. He must
have slipped right through during the partial dematerialisation. There's a clever
dog. The Doctor heard a door close behind hims. He turned and saw a figure in
space coveralls and goggles moving off down the corridor. 'Excuse me,' called
the Doctor. 'Have you seen any sign of -' Suddenly the Doctor realised - this was
the man who had ambushed him.

At the sound of the Doctor's voice, the figure spun round in alarm and ran
off down the corridor. Instinctively the Doctor ran after it. 'Hey, stop!'

He ran down the corridor, turned a corner and came to a lift. Its doors were
just closing. The Doctorm dashed up to the lift, but the sliding doors closed in
his face. The Doctor checked the indicator and saw that the lift was going down.
Glancing round, he saw a door marked 'STAIRS' and headed for it at a run.

The Doctor rattled down a steep metal staircase, through the door at the
bottom and out into the lower-level corridor - just in time to see his quarry
disappearing through a set of double doors at the far end. The Doctor hurried
after him and found himself in what he realised must be the tourist passenger
section of the cruise liner. He could see row upon row of reclining seats, in which
space-coveralled and goggled passengers were dozing and chatting, waiting for
the voyage to come to an end. As soon as the Doctor appeared, he was met with
a babble of questions.

'Why has there been a delay?'
'What's going on here?'
'When are we going to land, we've been waiting for ages?'
'Is there anything wrong?'
I'm looking for a man dressed in coveralls and goggles like you,' shouted

the Doctor. 'Which way did he go?'
There he is - down there,' said a passenger, and the Doctor saw a figure

hurrying down the long centre aisle.
Brushing aside the passengers, the Doctor hurried in pursuit.
He went through another passenger section, then another, and yet another.

Just as he was gaining on the hurrying figure, a large and angry female passenger
blocked his way. 'What's the meaning of all this delay? When are we going to
land on Azure?'

'Please, Madam, let me by. We're doing all we can, I promise you.'.
'And what are you doing exactly? I demand to know.'
The Doctor took a crumpled paper bag from his pocket, and stopped the

woman's mouth with a sweet. 'Here, have a jelly baby and don't forget to brush
your teeth!' Squeezing past the irate woman, the Doctor hurried on his way.

But the delay had cost him time. The hurrying figure was almost out of
sight. This was the last of the passenger sections and, as the Doctor shot out of
the doors, he saw yet another lift, its door closing against him. This time the
indicator showed that the lift was moving upwards.

A second lift stood beside the first, doors open. The Doctor leaped inside
and stabbed at the controls. The doors closed, the lift rose smoothly, the doors



opened again, and the Doctor sprang out into the corridor -in time to see the
man he was after hurrying down the corridor. 'Stop!' yelled the Doctor. The man
broke into a run and vanished around the corner.

The Doctor ran after him, turned the corner - and found the way ahead
blocked by a wall of frozen fog.

They had reached another interface.
The figure drew a blaster from beneath its coveralls and turned round at bay.
The Doctor moved cautiously forward. I only wanted a word with you

whoever you are. If I'm not mistaken you took something frommy pocket a while
ago, and I'd like it back.'

The figure whirled round and plunged into the fog.
TheDoctor hesitated amoment - and then ran after him. He found himself in

a strange, blurred, nightmarish region, where reality was wrenched and distorted.
He seemed to be nowhere, and yet in several places at once. He struggled forward
with immense effort, as though the air had solidified. Somewhere ahead, he
glimpsed the blurred figure of the man he was hunting.

The Doctor struggled onwards.
Sublimely indifferent to the fate of his ship, Captain Rigg sprawled on one

of the couches in the VIP lounge, a drink in his hand. Romana and Tryst were
watching him in concern.

'Little ships inside big ships,' said Rigg suddenly. 'Like ships in bottles - or
like those sets of Russian dolls, one inside the other. Remember them?'

'Yes, I do actually,' said Romana. 1 don't suppose the people who made
them realised they were making a kind of primitive model of the universe.'

Rigg grinned foolishly at her. 'Whassat you say?'
Professor Tryst cleared his throat. I don't think the Captain is in the mood

to discuss philosophy at the moment. Can I get you anything from the dispenser,
Captain? A caffeine capsule perhaps?'

Rigg waved the offer away. 'No! Let's talk about life - while I wait for
my dismissal and execution! Gross dereliction of duty ... and you know what?
I couldn't care less!'

'You are too pessimistic, Captain.' reproved Tryst. 'There is still a chance
the Doctor may succeed.'

'The Doctor! If you ask me, the enigmatic, all-mighty, Mister Fixit Doctor's
just failed again - and I don't care about that, either,'

'He hasn't failed yet,' said Romana. 'I think I'd better go and see what he's
doing.'

As Romana left, Rigg leaned closer to Tryst, with an expression of drunken
cunning. 'Suppose it's them, eh? Suppose they're the ones who are smuggling
drugs .. .'

Tryst went over to the dispenser and dialled the traditional remedy for
Rigg's condition - a cup of strong black coffee. He carried it back over to Rigg.
'Here, this will make you feel better.' As Rigg sipped the coffee, Tryst went-on,
'Surely you don't really suspect the Doctor of being a drug smuggler?'

Rigg stared at him in fuddled surprise. 'The Doctor? Of course not, he's a
narcotics agent!'

'I see. Then we must give him all the help we can. What about his friend
Romana - is she an agent too?'



'What if she is, I don't care. It doesn't matter.' Rigg leaned forward, as if
about to share some great secret. 'Don't you see, nothingmatters. Nothingmatters
at all.. .'

Still wading through a blurred unreality, the Doctor sprang forward and
grappled with the man he was pursuing. They struggled for a moment, and the
doctor snatched a bracelet from theman's wrist. Suddenly a third figure appeared.
through the fog, charging straight towards them. The Doctor felt the impact of
a massive furred body as the creature smashed into them, knocking them apart.
There was a savage roar...



7. The Rescuer

Romana heard the roaring as she turned the corner and came upon the
barrier of frozen fog. She stopped in astonishment, listening.

Suddenly a monstrous shaggy figure lurched out of the fog and shambled
towards her, green eyes blazing, fangs slavering, great clawed paws slashing the
air.

Romana stood petrified with horror, the claws reached out - and another
figure appeared from the fog. It was a man in coveralls and goggles, a blaster in
his hand. He fired and the monster swung round, focusing on its attacker.

Springing to one side, the man fired again, and yet again. Romana realised
that the shots were driving the creature back towards the fog. A final shot, and
the creature fled.

The man looked at Romana for a second, as if assuring himself she was
unharmed, then turned and vanished into the fog.

Before Romana had fully recovered from these events there came another
surprise. The Doctor appeared, crawling out of the mist-zone on his hands and
knees.

Delightedly Romana ran up to him and helped him to his feet. Doctor, are
you all right? Some sort of creature came out of there, it was horrible ... We'd
better get away from here. There was this man, he drove it off. And what were
you doing in there any-way? Oh, come on, Doctor!'

She tried to drag him away and the Doctor said, 'Stop making such a fuss,
Romana. Do you realise I have just come through a matter interface - no mean
feat that! I'm not even sure I am all here yet.' The Doctor began patting himself,
as if to make sure nothing vital was missing.

'You mean you've been right through, from the other side?'
'I most certainly have. Did you see anyone else, before I came out? Fellow

in space coveralls and dark goggles?'
Romana nodded. 'He rescued me from the monster, shot at it and drove it

off.'
'That was the man I was chasing, the same chap who jumped me in the

luggage section,' The Doctor realised he was clutching something in his hand.
He examined it, then held it out to Romana. 'Well, at least we know something
about him now. That's his radiation bracelet, it came off in the struggle.'

Romana read the lettering across the base of the little plastic strip. 'Volante'
'That's right. The name of Tryst's ship. Rigg said that Tryst and Delia were

the only ones from the expedition to come on board.'
'A stowaway?'
'It's possible. We'd better have a word with Rigg-'
'I wouldn't bother if I were you, Doctor. Rigg's chicked up under the strain.

He's drunk.'
The Doctor stared at her. 'He was unwell in the control room rushed off

suddenly - but drunk? Surely not. Rigg's a professional, he'd never drink on duty,
particularly at a time like this.'



'Well, he was sitting about in the lounge just now, saying he didn't care
about anything and nothing mattered. He just giggles and laughs all the time,
and there's a sick grin on,his face.'

It could be drink, of course,' said the Doctor slowly. 'Or it could be
something far worse.'

'Vraxoin? But where would he get it from? I thought you said Rigg had
checked both ships.'

'He did. But there's one place where Vraxoin wouldn't show up on the
scanner - inside the CET machine. That's the only place, Romana.'

'It's an interesting theory, Doctor. How do we test it?'
'By going inside the machine ourselves -'
They turned a corner and found Tryst hurrying towards them.
'Ah, there you are, Doctor, I've been looking for you. Captain Rigg is

unwell, he has retired to his quarters. But before he went he told me about this
terrible drug business. I believe I may be able to help you.' Tryst moved closer
and spoke in a low voice. 'In my opinion the drugs were smuggled on my ship
-and I'm pretty sure I know who did it!'

'And who was that?'
'There is really only one possibility - Stott, the third member of my

expedition.'
'I thought he'd been killed - on Eden.'
'He was - but he must have passed on the drugs before he died.'
'To whom?'
'Delia, of course. They were very close, you know. I made some attempt to

question her, but of course she would admit nothing.'
'Perhaps because she's innocent?' suggested Romana acidly. 'How do you

know it was her?'
'My dear young lady, who else could it be?'
'This man Stott, for one' suggested the Doctor. 'Are you quite sure he's dead?

I mean, did you actually see the body?'
'He was acting strangely for some time when we were on Eden - then one

day he went into the jungle and disappeared. We searched and found nothing.
Why do you ask, Doctor?'

'Well, as a matter of fact -'
A metallic voice from the intercom system interrupted him. 'Will the

individual calling himself the Doctor please report to the bridge immediately.'
There was no sign of Captain Rigg when the Doctor and Romana came onto

the bridge. Dymond was in the command chair and there were two grim-faced,
black-uniformed figures standing beside him. More black-uniformed guards
were grouped behind them.

'Ah, there you are, Doctor,' said Dymond. 'This is Officer Fisk, and Officer
Costa, of the Azure Customs and Excise Serviqe. I've been telling them all about
you, Doctor. They were very interested.'

The Doctor nodded amiably. 'How do you do, gentlemen? Listen, we've got
a very serious -'

Officer Fisk, obviously the more senior of the two officials, marched up to
the Doctor. Costa, his colleague, moved to stand beside Romana.

'Identity plaque,' snapped Fisk.



'Can't I just tell you about this drug smuggling -
'Identity plaque, please,' repeated Fisk emotion-lessly.
'Listen, somewhere on this ship ..
'I want to see your identity plaque - now!'
'Yours too, miss,' added Costa.
Romana shook her head. 'I haven't got one,'
'Neither have I,' said the Doctor.
Officer Fisk looked shocked. 'No identi-plaque. That's a serious offence for

a start.'
'Someone's smuggling drugs,' yelled the Doctor. 'Drugs! Vraxoin!'
'Names and dates of birth,' droned Fisk.
How do I know their names and dates of birth? I haven't even found out

who it is yet.'
'Your name and date of birth,' said Fisk wearily.
'Look, just call me the Doctor. As for my date of birth, I can never

remember. Sometime quite soon, I think.'
'I would advise you not to play the fool with us, sir,' said Fisk heavily.
'Will you please listen to me for a moment. Vraxoin is the most dangerously

addictive drug in existence, and there's a supply somewhere on this ship.'
'Well come to that all in good time, sir.'
There is no good time,' snapped the Doctor. 'These criminals must be caught

-'
'Costa, check these two over,' snapped Fisk.
Costa produced a black scanner rod, attached by a flexi-lead to the power

pack in his belt. 'We'll start with you, miss.'
Romana stood' glaring at him while he moved the rod up and down the

length of her body. 'She's clean, sir.'
'Now the man.'
Costa moved over to the Doctor and repeated the process.
'You're wasting time with all this nonsense,' said the Doctor impatiently.

'Why don't you just -'
A sudden loud bleeping came from the scanner. Costa checked readings on

a dial in its handle. 'Vraxoin, sir. Traces of it in his pocket.'
Fisk gave a smile of satisfaction. 'So we've got to catch the criminals, have

we, Doctor? You're under arrest.'
The Doctor sighed. 'All right. May I just say one thing?'
'Well?'
'Run for it, Romana', yelled the Doctor and sprinted for the door. Roman

was close behind him and they were out of the room before astonished excise
men could react.

The Doctor had stabbed at the door in passing. By the time Fisk and Costa
realised what had happened, the door was closing in their faces. Fisk hit the door
control, waited for the door to reopen, and dashed off in pursuit of the fugitives.

The Doctor and Romana sprinted down the corridors and ducked into the
VIP lounge. The Doctor ran to the CET machine and switched it on. 'Quick,
Romana, find me Eden.'

While Romana switched the selector, the Doctor ran to the door and locked
it, then came back to the machine. 'Quickly, Romana.'



'All right, Doctor, I've got it,' The landscape of Eden sprang into life on
the wall. The same dense green jungle, the same eerie cries, the same glowing,
orange sky.

There came a sudden hammering on the door and they heard Fisk yelling,
'Open this door. Open up, or well blast the lock! '

Romana turned to the Doctor. 'Well, what do we do now?'
'It's time to test that theory of mine. Come on!'
Romana held back. 'No, Doctor, we can't. It's too unstable.'
The crackle of a blaster came from the corridor and the door-lock began

to smoke.
'Come on, Romana. We've got to do it!'
'We could get torn apart!'
'We'll have to risk it,' yelled the Doctor. Grabbing Romana's hand, he

dragged her into the projection. The jungle of Eden swallowed them up.



8. Man-eater

The Doctor and Romana plunged headlong into the jungle. By the time
they stopped for breath, they were surrounded by dense foliage. Broad-leaved
plants and long, trailing vines struggled for space between mighty trees, whose
leaves formed an oppressive canopy overhead. Between the tree-tops, there was
an occasional glimpse of Eden's lurid, orange sky. The ground underfoot was
damp and soggy, the air warm and humid, filled with the cries of night-birds
and shrill chirping of insects. Somewhere not far away, something heavy was
crashing through the bushes.

The Doctor looked down at Romana, mopping his brow. 'Well, What do
you think of Eden?'

'Not much!'
'Neither do I. But we might find a few answers here, all the same.'
Romana looked around. 'Which way shall we go?'
The Doctor pointed at random. 'Let's go east.'
'How do you know that way's east?'
'I don't. So, let's go that way and call it east.'
'Why not call it north?'
'All right, well call it north.'
'Tell you what, we'll compromise,' said Romana. 'Call it northeast,'
A savage growl came from somewhere too close for comfort.
'Listen,' said the Doctor. 'Whatever direction we call it, can we please stop

talking and get moving?
They set off through the jungle.
A shaggy green-eyed form watched them from behind a nearby tree, its lips

drawn back in a savage snarl.
It was hard-going through the jungle. There was only the faintest of tracks,

and they were constantly thrusting plants and bushes aside.
The Doctor led the way, doing his best to clear a path for Romana. After a

while they came to a tiny clearing and paused to rest.
Romana leaned wearily against an enormous tree-trunk. 'Doctor, how did

you know we could get into the projection?'
'Same way I know I can get into the TARDIS. Our friend Tryst doesn't

realise what he's stumbled on with that ramshackle machine of his - at least, I
don't think he does.'

'What has he stumbled on?'
'He's managed to create a limited relative dimensional field.' The Doctor

swept his arm round in a circle. 'All this is recorded on laser crystal. When it's
played back, it's restructured on an intra-dimensional matrix - roughly speaking,
that is.'

Romana said thoughtfully, 'And without a dimensional osmosis damper,
everything got mixed up together after the accident, and we can just walk straight
into the projection.'

'That's right.'
'So presumably anything else can just walk straight out.'



The Doctor nodded. 'And we both saw one of the things that walked out,
back on the ship. We'd better keep moving.'

As they set off again, something crashed by in the distance. Romana
shivered. 'We wouldn't even be here if it wasn't for those idiotic customs men.'

The Doctor was struggling to thrust aside a particularly stubborn plant.
'Idiots! They're worse than idiots, they're bureaucrats. All they do is tangle people
up in red tape, Wrap them round and round until they can't move.' Suddenly the
Doctor gave a yell of alarm. 'Romana!'

'What's the matter?'
'I can't move!'
Romana forced her way to the Doctor's side, tentacle-like vines coiling

around her body. 'Neither can I!' She began struggling wildly.
'No, don't wriggle,' yelled the Doctor. 'Keep as still as you can. The more

you struggle, the more it'll think it's dinner time.'
'Dinner time?'
'That's right. This particular plant is a man-eater!'
The tentacles around the Doctor began to tighten, drawing him closer and

closer to the centre of the plant.
Romana tried to pull him back, but she herself was tangled in vines and the

plant seemed appallingly strong.
'Never mind getting me free,' yelled the Doctor. 'Root!'
'What?'
'The root - thing like a long cable - get hold of it and bring it to me.'
Although Romana's legs were tangled up, her arms were relatively free. She

flung herself forwards, grabbed hold of the long cable-like root and heaved it up
towards the Doctor. With a frantic lunge, the Doctor grabbed hold of the root.
He tried to twist it and break it in his hands, but it was far too tough.

The plant dragged him closer, and a gaping green mouth opened to receive
him.

With't last desperate effort, the Doctor sank his teeth into the root tendril
and bit into it savagely. Green liquid spured out like blood, the plant lashed
convulsively, and just for a moment the tendrils relaxed their grip beneath the
shock.

The Doctor wrenched himself free, grabbing Romana and pulling her after
him. 'Are you all right?'

'I think so ~ let's get away from that thing.'
The Doctor wiped the 1ast traces of green fluid from his lips. 'You know,

that thing didn't taste at all bad!'
Giving the still-lashing plant a wide berth, they forced their way on through

the jungle.
Before very long, the blundering crashing sounds came again, close behind

them this time.
'Something is following us,' Whispered Romana.
The crashing came again this time from in front of them.
'More than one something, by the sound of it,' said the Doctor. Suddenly

a huge shaggy figure burst out of the btsshes and stood on the trail just in front
of them, pawing the air and swinging its head to and fro. Romana saw again the



glowing green eyes, the powerfull jaws and slavering fangs, the massive paws
tipped with razor sharp sharp claws.

'Don't move,' whispered the Doctor. 'Don't make a sound'
They froze like statues, scarecly daring to breath.
After what seemed like a very long time, the creature snarled angrily and

blundered off through the jungle.
The Doctor let out a long sigh of relief. 'Right, on we go. Take care - '
They moved on a few more yards - and a second monster crashed out of

the jungle. This one was almost on top of them, and there was no doubt that it
had seen them.

Throwing back its head it gave a roar of anger, then blundered forward,
slashing the air with its claws.

As they turned to run, the crackle of a blaster came from the Jungle shadows.
With a scream of rage, the creature turned to face the new threat. The blaster
fired again, and yet again. Howling with pain and terror, the monster fled,
disappearing amongst the bushes.

A figure stepped out of the shadows and came towards them. Peering
through the gloom, Romana saw a tall curly-haired man in space coveralls.

As the man walked towards them, the Doctor said, 'You seem to have saved
our lives, very kind of you.'

Now that the man was near them, Romana could see that there were fading
claw-marks on one side of his face. 'Who are you?'

'My name's Stott.'
The Doctor fished the plastic bracelet from his pocket. 'Stott... from the

Volante. Am I right? I think this belongs to you.'
Stott took the bracelet and nodded. The Doctor went on, 'I'm the Doctor and

this is Romana. We're travellers and --'
'We better not stay here,' interrupted Stott. 'I know somewhere safe, follow

me.'
Stott led them through the jungle as a rapid pace until they coached a plastic

survival dome in a clearing.
They went inside and the Doctor looked around approvingly. 'Not bad. not

bad at all. I see that you have made yourself quite comfortable.'
The survival dome was the usual lightweight structure, made of green

plastic with dimond shapedwindows and doors. As the name implied it contained
the basic equipment for survival: bed, table, chair, a store of food and water, a
solar-power pack to provide warnith and light. 'How long have you been here?'
asked the Doctor.

'Ever since I was left for dead on Eden.'
'What happened ?'
'Someone shot me down from behind, left me in the jungle to die. I survived

though, managed to crawl back here. Then I got caught up in the Event
Transmuter and imprisoned in the projection when Tryst took his samples.'

Romana looked at the scars on his face. 'How did you get those marks?'
'I ran into a Mandrel - one of those things I chased off just now.'
'Did you hear that, Doctor?' said Romana. 'They're a called Mandrels.'
'Fascinating,' said the Doctor drily. He turned to Stott. 'What happened

next?'



'I thought I was trapped in here for the rest of my life. The hardest thing
was being able to look out and see Delia.'

'When did you first discover you could get out of the projection?'
'Just after the accident. Something must have gone rrong with the CET

machine. The edge of the projection was shimmering. I discovered I could walk
right through it, and found myself on the Empress.'

'Why didn't you tell anyone when you realised u could get out? Why did
you go sneaking about the ship disguised as a passenger? And why did you stun
me and take Seeker's Vraxoin?'

'Because of what I am and what I'm doing,' Stott produced an identi-plaque
and handed it to the Doctor. 'I'm a Major in the Intelligence Section of the Space
Corps, on a special drug running assignment.'

The Doctor examined the plaque and returned it 'And you thought I was the
one you were after?'

'Well, when I found you by Seeker's locker - with Vraxoin in your pocket...'
'What changed your mind?'
I overheard you two talking in the lounge.'
Tryst says you're the drug smuggler,' said Romana. 'Now he's saying Delia's

involved as well. He says he didn't realise his machine was being used to
transport Vraxoin - if you store it inside a projection on the CET machine, it
doesn't show up on a scan.'

Well, if the Vraxoin's here in the Eden projection, I haven't found it,' said
Stott wearily. 'The smugglers will have arranged for a pick-up somewhere along
the line. That means they'll have to get the stuff out of the machine and pass it on.'

'Seeker must have been working with them,' said the Doctor. They made
him an addict and paid him off with the drug. He only had a little though - you
took the last phial from me.'

'That would have been his personal supply - just a tiny sample. I need to
know where the main supply is hidden - and more important, where's the new
source?'

The Doctor stood up. The first thing to do is to get this projection safely
sealed off again - which means we've got to separate the ships. Tell me, can we
get out of the projection somewhere near the Empress power room?'

'Certainly. You can leave the projection at any point in the matter interface.'
Then let's get moving. Lead the way, Major Stott'
Stott led them to a place where the jungle ended in awall of frozen fog. They

plunged in and found themselves in the strange slow-motion world of the matter
interface. Stott led the way confidently, and after an immeasurable amount of
time they emerged from the blurred zone to find themselves in the power room
- facing an astonished K9.

'Look out!' yelled Stott, and reached for his blaster.
'It's all right,' said the Doctor cheerfully. 'This is a friend of mine.'
'What is it?'
'Oh, just a perfectly normal electronic dog. This is Major Stott, K9, he's a

friend.'
The Doctor looked round. They were in a long steel chamber, the walls of

which were studded with control panels and crammed with dome-shaped reactor
housings.



'Now let me see - liquid-hydrogen pump, turbo-pump exhaust, reactor, core,
pressure shell. All looks simple enough,' The Doctor produced his sonic
screwdriver and attacked the main power console.

Romana looked dubiously at him. 'Doctor, do you really think you can get
this thing going?'

'Of course I can. I can start anything from a steam engine to a TARDIS.
Got a match?'

'Whatever for? It's not,gas-fired is it?'
'No, but I need to jam this switch down. Ah, this'll do.' The Doctor fished a

wooden toothpick from his pocket, jammed the switch and set to work.
K9 glided up to him. 'During your absence, my sensors detected the

presence of alien creatures in this. Large ferocious beasts of limited intelligence.'
'Mandrels!' exclaimed Romana.
'Name of alien creature noted, Mistress.'
The Doctor looked up from his work. 'You'd better guard the door, K9. How

many were there?'
'Five units, Master.'
The Doctor looked worried. 'Five! We'd better get a move on or they'll be

swarming all over the ship!'
'Shouldn't we try to deal with them now, Doctor.' asked Romana.
'As long as the projection is unstable. Mandrels can enter the ship from

Eden whenever they like. It'd be like trying to bail out a small boat with a sieve.
The large and determined woman to whom the Doctor had given a jelly

baby was marching along the ship's corridor escorted by an embarrassed young
crewman, who was trying to mollify her without success. 'I assure you we're
doing everything possible, Madam. The Captain's got an expert to advise him-'

'We should have been on Azure hours ago, young man. My fellow
passengers have asked me to represent them and I insist on taking our complaints
to the Captain.'

'I'm afraid the Captain's unwell at the moment, Madam. But I assure you
we're doing everything possible to get you to Azure -' The crewman talked on,
but the large woman refused to listen.

I insist on seeing the Captain!'
They'd reached the lift by now. Resignedly the crewman pressed the button.
The lift door slid smoothly open - and a Mandrel sprang out, roaring

savagely. One slashing blow silenced the complaining woman forever. The
crewman was struck down as he turned to run.

With a roar of triumph, the Mandrel lurched off down the corridor.



9. Monster Attack

Captain Rigg lolled back in his command chair, a fixed grin twisting his
face. The control room was filled with the blaring of alarms and the monitor
screen in front of him showed a scene of panic and horror, as terrified passengers
fled the attacking Mandrels.

Officer Costa came running into the control room and stopped in
astonishment at the sight of Rigg. 'I take it you're the Captain? What's going on
here?'

'Oh, nothing much,' said Rigg airily.
Costa looked in horror at the monitor screen. 'What's happening? What are

those things?'
'A judgement,' said Rigg cheerfully. 'A judgement on us all!' And he burst

out laughing.
'I'll have you shot for this, Captain,' snarled Costa. Shoving Rigg aside, he

leaned over the intercom. 'Bridge here. Emergency! Passengers in section sixty-
seven are under attack. Security guards proceed to area sixty-seven immediately.'
Costa straightened up. 'I shall be charging youwith gross neglect of duty, Captain
Rigg. The safety of the passengers should be-your first concern, and here you sit
looking on while they're attacked and killed.'

'Oh, what does it matter?' said Rigg carelessly. 'They're only tourist
passengers after all. What's all the fuss about?'

Costa was too angry to speak.
The Doctor had lifted the cover off the instrument panel and was working

on the fine crystal circuitry beneath. Meanwhile Romana was busy tracing the
feed lines to the power core. 'Make sure you get the right cable, Romana,' called
the Doctor. 'Because if you don't '

There was a sudden scream from Romana. 'Look out, Doctor! Mandrel!'
She ran out from behind the reactor housing, the massive shaggy form of

a Mandrel lumbering behind her.
The Doctor grabbed her hand and they backed away rapidly. 'K9!' yelled

the Doctor. 'Quickly, K9!'
The Mandrel roared and charged, green eyes blazing - and K9 glided in

from the corridor and blasted it down.
There came a volley of shots from the doorway and Stott appeared, blaster

in hand. 'They're coming from both sides, Doctor!'
'You and K9 will have to hold them off between you, I've got to get this job

finished. Did you check the cable to the reactor, Romana?'
'Well, I was. interrupted, Doctor, but I'm pretty sure it's the right one.'
'Check it again, I need to be absolutely sure!' Romana hesitated, unwilling

to go too close to the dead Mandrel.
The Doctor poked it in the ribs with his foot. It didn't stir. 'It's all right,

Romana, it's quite dead!'
'If you say so, Doctor.' Gingerly Romana stepped over the Mandrel's body

and disappeared behind the reactor housing. After a moment the Doctor called,
'Was it the right one, Romana?'



'No, I'm sorry, it was the one below.'
'Just as well you made sure, there could have been a rather spectacular

explosion.'
Picking up the right cable, the Doctor worked busily for a few minutes,

wiring it directly into the control circuitry.
Romana came to join him. 'Are we ready to go yet, Doctor?'
'More or less - but two things need to be done. The power controls on the

bridge have to be set at maximum and someone's got to switch on the demat gun
in the TARDIS - all at the same time as I start up this nuclear gas-oven here.
All clear?

By nowOfficer Fisk had joined Costa on the bridge. If possible he was even
more angry and outraged than his colleague. 'I am declaring this ship a disaster!
area, Captain Rigg. I'm assuming command and placing you under arrest for
gross dereliction of duty. Take him away, Costa, confine him to his quarters.'

Costa grabbed Rigg by the arm and dragged him from the bridge. Rigg went
with him unprotestingly, as if it was all part of an enormous practical joke. 'So
I'm under arrest, eh? That's really nice ...'

Fisk turned to Tryst. 'Now then, Professor, we've got to deal with these
Mandrels. Wemust seal them off, hunt them down and destroy them. I shall send
down to Azure for heavy-duty blasters.'

'I'd rather they weren't all killed,' protested Tryst. 'Can't you find some other
way?'

'Those things are killing people out there! What do you suggest we do with
them?'

'Some kind of tranquillising dart perhaps - I have a supply in my stores.'
'We haven't time to pussyfoot around, Professor, you're in enough trouble

as it is, I can't see why you concern yourself about the filthy things.'
The Mandrels are an endangered species as it is. Kill these and there will

be very few left.'
'I'm in charge here now, I shall do as I think best.' snapped Fisk.
A panicky voice crackled from the intercom. 'Fuel section to bridge - there

are two Mandrels attacking this section!'
'Then kill them!' ordered Fisk. 'Shoot them down! '
'We'll try, sir - but we're afraid of damaging the fuel tanks.'
'Then keep them under surveillance and destroy them as soon as it's safe

to do so.' He flicked to another channel. 'Security section - has there been any
sign of the Doctor?'

'Negative, Officer Fisk.'
'Pass the word. He's to be arrested on sight. If he offers any resistance, he's

to be shot down. That goes for his companion as well.'
There was a moment's silence from the corn-unit, then the voice said, 'Shoot

them down, sir - just like that.'
'Certainly. They're criminals, aren't they? What else do you do with

criminals?'
Professor Tryst looked worriedly at Fisk. It looked very much as if the

Empress's new commander was already cracking up under the strain.



At the door of the power unit, the Doctor was issuing final instructions to
his companions. 'Stott, can you guide Romana back through the jungle and get
her out of the projection near the TARDIS and the bridge?'

'Leave it to me, Doctor.'
'Right. Now 1 want you to go back the way you came, K9.'
'Negative, Master,' squawked K9 agitatedly. 'It is unsafe to pass through

matter interfaces ...
'Stott and I got through all right. All you need is a little determination, K9.

You can do it'
Determination: fixed purpose; firmness of character. Affirmative, Master!'
'Thats the idea. Now, when you get through, I want you to go back to the

TARDIS. I've get up a demat booster just beside it.' The Doctor produced his
soundless dog-whistle. 'When I blow this' you switch on, all right?'

'Affirmative'
'What about you. Doctor,' asked Romana, 'You're not going to be down here

when the power unit comes on, are you? Theway you've rigged things up, there'll
probably be a radiation leakage at least, and maybe even a localised explosion.'

'Of course I'm not staying here. I shall rig up a little timing device before
I go. Could I borrow your watch, Major?

Stott slipped off his heavy-duty astronaut's watch and handed it over. 'There
you are. It's set to ship's time.'

The Doctor looked at the watch. Good. I'll give you until 20.25 to get to the
bridge and switch the power on. I'll preset my device and get away in good time.

'What about the Mandrels,' asked Romana. 'You won't have K9 with you,
remember.'

'Then I shall have to use my wits, won't I?' The Doctor beamed
encouragingly. 'Now, off you go. Watch out for the Mandrels and watch out for
those excise men from Azure, Fisk and costa. I don't think they lke us very much
at the moment.'

Stott, Romana and K9 hurried off down the corridore. The Doctor checked
the time on Stott's watch. It read 20.01.

He hurried back into the Power unit and set to work.
As it happened, Fisk was addressing a squad of armed security men on the

bridge at that very moment. 'I want this ship searched from top to bottom. If you
see the Doctor and his companion, arrest them. If they resist, kill them!'

The squad leader saluted and marched his men away.
Captain Dymond strode down the corridor towards the shuttle bay. He was

wearing a space suit, the helmet held under his arm. Professor Tryst was with him
and they were talking in low, urgent voices. They stopped outside the airlock.
'We'll just have to see how things develop,' said Tryst. 'I'll be in touch.'

Dymond nodded and went into the airlock, closing the door behind him.
Tryst walked away looking very preoccupied.
Romana and Stott were hurrying through the dense jungle of Eden. Stott

lead the way confidendy along the narrow overgrown trail.
'Look out!' screamed Romana.
A Mandrel leaped roaring from the jungle.
Stott's blaster was already in his hand and he blasted the monster down with

a volley of shots.



As they edged past the body and continued on their way, it occurred to
Romana that there couldn't be that many Mandrels left on Eden.

The Doctor was using Stott's watch for the main part of his timing
mechanism, wiring it into the circuitry so that it would switch on the antiquated
engines at precisely 20.25.

Behind him lay the body of the Mandrel, shot down by K9. In his
preoccupation, the Doctor had forgotten that Mandrels are incredibly tough. K9
had fired only once, while Stott had always fired several times - it took more
than one blast to kill a Mandrel - and the massive creature just behind the Doctor
was beginning to stir ...

As the Doctor worked on, the Mandrel rose slowly to its hind legs behind
him. It raised its paw to strike ... His work complete, the Doctor straightened
up. 'There we are, all finished with time to spare!' He was about to put away his
sonic screwdriver when it slipped between his fingers and rattled to the floor. The
Doctor stooped to pick it up, and the razor-sharp claws of the Mandrel whizzed
over his head. Snatching up the sonic screwdriver, the Doctor backed away. The
Mandrel lumbered after him, growling angrily.

The Doctor backed to his timing device. His eyes fixed on the Mandrel, he
reached out and switched it on.

The action seemed to disturb the Mandrel and it lunged forward with a roar
of fury. The Doctor ducked and the paw missed him by inches slamming instead
into the centre of the nowlive circuit.

As the heavy paw struck it, the circuitry exploded in a crackle of power and
a shower of sparks.

'Oh not' yelled the Doctor in dismay.
For a moment the heavy body of the Mandrel was outlined in fire. Then it

vanished, collapsing in on itself, reducing with amazing speed to a pile of dust
on the floor of the power unit.

Astonished, theDoctor stood looking down at the little heap of grey powder,
all that remained of the once-powerful beast. There was something very familiar
about that dust...

The Doctor bent down, took a pinch between finger and thumb, and rubbed
it between his fingers. 'Of course Vraxoin!'

So that was the mysterious source of the drug, thought the Doctor. The
Mandrels of Eden. Something in the organic composition of the planet's soil,
absorbed into the Mandrel's body, transmuted, rendered up into its final form
when the Mandrel was destroyed by intense heat.

'So that's it,' muttered the Doctor. It was satisfying to have at least one
mystery solved, but there were more urgent problems.

With frantic speed, the Doctor started work on his shattered timer.
Luckily Stott's watch was still undamaged and, even more amazingly, it

was still working.
The dial read 30.15.
The Doctor had exactly ten minutes.



10. The Plotters

The jungle of Eden came to a sudden shimmering end - and Romana found
herself looking out into the VIP lounge. She could see Fisk and Costa sitting
with drinks at a table near the door.

She turned to Stott. 'Look, I can find my way from here. Will you go back
and help the Doctor, he may need you to guide him through.'

Stott hesitated. 'What.about those two?'
'I'll manage.'
'Right. Good luck.' Stott disappeared into the jungle.
Romana looked at Fisk and Costa. Their backs were towards her, their heads

down over a pile of papers. Choosing her moment, she slipped out of the
projection and into the lounge, ducking down behind a couch.

She heard Costa's voice. 'How much longer will we have to stay on board
the ship, sir?'

Then Fisk's reply. 'Until the job's over, of course.'
'How many casualties so far, sir?'
There was a rustle of paper. 'Twelve dead, twenty-nine injured. Enough for

a small war.'
There was something very like satisfaction in Fisk's voice.
'You know what this means, Costa? Promotion! Promotion for both of us.

A disaster as big as this and we'll be the ones who sorted it out and captured
the criminals.'

'We haven't exactly done either, yet, sir.'
'Just matter of time. The Empress's crew will deal with those creatures in

the end. As for the criminals, we've got two ready-made culprits, the Doctor and
the girl. We'll be the golden boys of the service.'

'We don't actually know they're the criminals, sir.'
'You found traces of Vraxoin in the Doctor's pocket, didn't you?What more

do we need? Once I get my hands on them, we'll have a nice quick confession,
I'll see to that. Or better still, they'll be shot trying to escape. One thing about
dead suspects, they never argue. Come on!'

Romana heard the rustle of papers being gathered up and stowed away.
Then came the sound of the two men leaving the lounge.

Romana waited for them to get clear and then slipped out after them.
She managed to reach the control room without being seen and hurried

inside. To her relief the bridge was empty. She was heading for the power control
console at the far end when suddenly Rigg stumbled on to the bridge. He thrust
her aside. 'Tried to lock me up, they did. Me! I soon dealt with their stupid guard,
never knew what hit him. I'm still Captain of this ship.'

He glared truculently up at her, face drawn and eyes red-rimmed.
'Listen, Captain Rigg,' said Romana urgently. The Doctor's managed to get

into the power unit. We're going to try and separate the ships.'
Suddenly she realised that Rigg hadn't been listening to her. He leaned

forward. 'Listen, you've got to give me something ... something I need.' His voice
was slurred and his eyes completely mad.



Romana backed away. 'Please, Captain, I must put full power on.'
Rigg ignored her. 'I must have something, you see. Something for this

terrible craving.'
'But I haven't got anything to give you.
'Oh yes you have,' whispered Rigg crazily. 'Vraxoin! Someone fedmeVrax,

you see, and I'm hooked just like Seeker was. You and the Doctor are smuggling,
aren't you? I know you've got the stuff.'

Romana made her voice sound calm end reasonable. 'Look Captain, just let
me set the controls and I'll help you. You want us to free your ship, don't you?'

'I don't care about the stupid ship, woman. I want something to stop me
feeling like this, something to give me that wonderful feeling of happiness
again .. You can help, cant you?' Rigg fished a handful a plastic cards out of his
pocket. 'I've got plenty of credits, you can have whatever you want.'

Romana thrust him away. 'Just let us get the ships in operation again and
we can get you medical help. They can cure you.'

Rigg glared at her with murder in his eyes. 'Why?' he sobbed. 'Why won't
you help me. You've got the stuff. Now, 1et me have some, or I will kill you!'

He sprang forward with his hands reaching for her throat.
'I haven't got any,' gasped Romana. She backed away again, Rigg came after

her and forced her into a corner. Romana screamed...
Suddenly there came the crackle of a blaster from the doorway. Rigg

stiffened and fell.
Romana looked up and sawOfficer Fisk in the doorway, blaster in his hand.

There were two armed security guards beside him.
'Thank you,' gasped Romana. 'I think he would have killed me.'
Fisk nodded to the guards, 'Take him away.' The guards dragged Rigg's

body out and Fisk turned his blaster on Romana. 'I shot him down because he
was an escaped prisoner. As for his killing you, it wouldn't have mattered much.
You're going to die anyway.

'Now, of course, if you were to make a full confession, things might go
easier with you .. .'

The Doctor was improvising a complicated electronic flash-up, working
against time at incredible speed. Sweat poured down his forehead and splashed
onto his hands.

The Doctor mopped his brow with his sleeve and went on working. He
glanced at the watch dial. It read 20.23. Less than two minutes to go.

'Look, there's nothing to confess,' said Romana desperately. 'We're not
smugglers the Doctor's trying to put an end to the smuggling.'

'You're smugglers all right, both of you. I heard Rigg asking you for
Vraxoin. Drug smuggling is punishable by death on Azure.'

'Whereas bureaucratic murder is rewarded by promotion? I heard you two
plotting in the lounge.'

Fisk shrugged. 'I didn't invent the rules - I just enforce them.'
Abandoning argument, Romana headed for the power console.
Fisk raised his blaster. 'Don't touch those controls.'
'You don't understand. The Doctor's in the power unit now. We're going to

try to separate the two ships. I've got to put the power controls to maximum now
or it just won't work.'



'I don't know what you're up to, but I intend to I prevent you anyway,' said
Fisk with a fine lack of logic. 'I advise you not to move. Touch those controls
I and I'll shoot!'

Romana reached for the power switch. 'You're going to kill me anyway.
What have I got to lose?'

In the power unit the Doctor finished work on the timer. Because of the
delay, it was now set to go off in just over one minute. The Doctor crossed his
fingers, uttered a quick mental prayer, switched on the mechanism, and sprinted
for the door.

One eye on the bridge clock, Romana stood with her hand over the power
switch.

Fitch levelled his blaster at her head. 'Touch that switch and I'll kill you.'
The bridge clock changed from 20.24 to 20.25.
Romana threw the switch.
In the power unit, the antiquated atomic motors came to life with a roar ...
The Doctor, still running, put the silent whistle to his lips and blew.
Waiting outside the TARDIS, K9 sent out the impulse that switched on the

demat booster. It began throbbing with life.
Locked together in space, the two ships began shimmering in and out of

dematerialisation... Slowly, very slowly, they began drawing apart.
All over the ship, reality blurred, twisted and shimmered.
Fisk staggered back, his shot going wild...
As the Doctor ran along the corridor a blurred zone appeared around him.
He tried desperately to break through, but he seemed trapped - the rone

seemed to be stretching, becoming wider and wider. With sudden horror the
Doctor realised that he'd been caught in a matter interface between the separatmg
ships. Unless he could reach the other side, the very molecules of ms body would
be torn apart.

11. The Secret of the Hecate
Separated at last, the space cruiser Empress and the sleek survey shipHecate

floated serenely side by side, in orbit around the beautiful ocean-planet of Azure.
Groaning, Fisk managed to sit up, raising his blaster. Before he could get

up, Romana kicked the weapon neatly from his hands and ran from the bridge.
Cursing and rubbing his hand, Fisk located the gun, picked it up and got

dazedly to his feet.
He heard an exultant voice from the monitor screen and saw Dymond's

excited face looking out at him. 'He's done it. Empress, this is Hecate! Full
separation has been achieved. There is no damage to report. Empress this is
Hecate, please respond.'

Fisk walked over to the screen. 'A11 right, Dymond, I can hear you,' he said
sourly. 'This is Fisk. Who gave you permission to return to your ship?'

'I came aboard for weapons to help fight those Mandrel things. The ships
separated while I was on board. Is there any damage to the Empress?'

'Doesn't seem to be,'
'Splendid. Then if you don't mind, Officer Fisk, I'll be on myway. Naturally

I won't be pressing any damage claims...'
The idea of Dymond being free to go about his business was quite

unacceptable to Fisk's bureaucratic mind. 'No, no, no, out of the question. There's



the drug smuggling, the escape of the Mandrels, the question of the Doctor.
There's bound to be a full enquiry and you'll be needed as a witness.'

'I can't afford any more delay,' protested Dymond furiously. 'I'll lose my
contract.'

Frustrated by Romana's escape, Fisk was glad to have someone he could
safely bully. 'This is an official warning, Captain Dymond. When this accident
occurred, you were in a prohibited area. That makes you liable to a heavy fine at
the very least. If you try to leave without my permission, I'll order the coastguard
battlecruisers to shoot you down. Do you understand me, Dymond?'

'Yes, Officer Fisk,' said Dymond wearily.
'Good. Then get yourself back on board the Empress right away.'
Romana ran up to the door of the TARDIS, where she found K9 looking

very pleased with himself. 'Operation one hundred per cent successful, Mistress,'
he reported smugly.

'Yes, I know, K9, but I can't find the Doctor. See if you can locate him with
your sensors.'

K9 whirred and clicked and revolved solemnly until he had described a full
circle. 'I regret, Mistress, no trace of the Doctor can be detected.'

'Well, he must be somewhere. Tell you what, K9, We'll split up and look
for him.'

'Affirmative, Mistress.'
Romana .hunted through the corridors of the Empress without success.

Everywhere seemed deserted, thougn once or twice she ducked into hiding as
a patrol of crewmen hurried by, presumably hunting for the few Mandrels still
at large.

She caught sight of a familiar figure at the end of a corridor and hurried
after it. It was Delia, helping a medic to push a trolley with a wounded passenger
into the sickbay.

Romana ran up to her. 'Delia, wait! Have you seen the Doctor anywhere?'
I've been too busy helpingwith the casualties,' Delia looked round, lowering

her voice. 'I heard that the excise men ordered him shot on sight - you too, I'm
afraid. We'd better go in here.'

They went into the empty ante-room of the sickbay. Through the window
they could see teams of medics working on wounded passengers.

Romana said. 'Delia, could you bear it if I asked you about Eden?'
'Why?'
'Tryst was hinting that you were involved in the drug running. We don't

believe him, but it would help if you could tell us what did happen.'
'All right,' Delia paused, remembering. 'I spent most of that last day with

Stott. We were very close by then, but he was acting strangely. He seemed to
want to get rid of me, kept on telling me to go back to the ship. I got the
impression he was looking for something,' She shuddered. 'Then it happened.
There was a shot from the forest and he fell. Then a Mandrel came out of the
jungle and I ran. I just couldn't help myself. I was so afraid. I just ran and left
him - and the Mandrel killed him.'

'How do you know?'
'Tryst told me. He was out looking for us and he found the body. He showed

me a visi-print. It was horrible...'



Romana put an arm round her shoulders. 'Stott didn't die, Delia. He's here,
on this ship. He got trapped in the Eden projection.'

Delia stared wonderingly at her. 'Where is he? I must see him.'
'Yes, of course - and we must find the Doctor as well!'
The Doctor awoke to find himself in a bare metal corridor, narrower and

darker than those on the Empress. He got groggily to his feet and found himself
outside a cabin door. He went inside.

The cabin, like the corridor, was dark and cramped, with battleship-grey
metal walls. Standing by the single porthole was a CET machine, exactly like
the one on the Empress, except for the laser cannon device clamped to its side.

TheDoctor scratched his head. 'An encoder laser. How odd! How very odd!'
The laser was trained out of the cabin's solitary porthole. The Doctor looked

out aligning himself along the sights of the laser. Floating just a few metres
away was the enormous bulk of the Empress - and the laser device was trained
precisely on one of the liner's many rows of portholes.

The Doctor sat down on the narrow bunk. It was obvious what had
happened. He'd reached the far edge of the blurred zone after all and had emerged
in a corridor on Dymond's ship, theHecate - where something strange was going
on.

There was a massive computer read-out terminal in 'the corner. The Doctor
went over to examine it -and heard footsteps coming down the corridor.

Quickly the Doctor ducked down into the dark corner behind the big
computer console. He heard someone come itito the cabin, sit down at the
computer terminal keyboard, and switch on the read-out screen. For a minute or
two the man sat at the keyboard punching up information. Then with a grun of
satisfaction, he rose and left the cabin. The Doctor waited a minute or two then
came out of his cramped hiding place. He sat down at the keyboard, studied the
controls, switched on the read-out screen and punched up 'Repeat'.

Immediately information began to flow across the screen.
'Eden Operation - Budget.'
Beneath were rows and rows of figures.
The display changed. 'Eden Operation Projected Turnover.' Then more

figures, many more of them this time. It was clear that profits were at least a
hundred times greater than expenditure. The Eden Operation, whatever it was,
was very profitable indeed.

The Doctor switched off the computer and slammed his fist down on the
console. 'The profits on human misery,' he muttered savagely.

He heard foosteps again and flattened himself behind the door. This time the
footsteps went right by and, looking out, the Doctor saw Dymond going down
the corridor in a space suit.

The Doctor tiptoed after him.
He followed Dymond down the narrow corridor into a small bare ante-

chamber, on the far side of which was an open airlock door. The Doctor could
see through the airlock and into the control cabin of the tiny shuttlecraft beyond.

Dymond stood with his back to the Doctor, He was putting on his helmet
and adjusting the seals. The Doctor slipped past him, through the airlock and into
the shuttlecraft, and ducked down into the cramped space behind the pilot's seat.



Seconds later there came the clang of the airlock door and the sound of
Dymond entering the cabin and settling himself in the pilot's seat. The Doctor
heard the roar of the motors, and something else - a strange hissing sound.

He peeped over the edge of the chair and saw Dymond attaching an oxygen
lead to the space helmet. With a sudden shock, the Doctor realised that the
shuttlecraft was so primitive that the cabin wasn't pressurised. He would be
making this journey without benefit of oxygen.

Luckily the trip would be a short one. Calling upon his Time Lord training,
the Doctor closed his eyes and went into a trance, suspending his life-processes
until the trip was over. The shuttlecraft separated itself from Hecate and floated
slowly towards the Empress.

Fisk studied the approaching shuttlecraft on the monitor screen on the
bridge of the Empress. He turned to Costa. 'Right, Dymond's on his way back.
Any sign of the Doctor?'

'No, sir, they're still searching.'
A voice behind them said. 'I think I may be able to tell you where the Doctor

is.'
Fisk turned. 'Professor Tryst! Why didn't you tell me this before?'
Tryst gave a rueful smile. 'I was afraid you wouldn't believe me. You still

may not.'
Fisk's voice hardened. 'Then convince me, Professor.'
'I think the Doctor went into the Eden projection.'
'What?'
'The CETmachine's image has become a kind of unstable dimensional field.

You remember that the projection was there in the lounge when you brok in? It's
there now. I have just discovered that someone has sabotaged the controls - the
projection cannot be changed, or the machine switched off.'

Delia and K9 were waiting outside the TARDUS when Romana arrived.
'Did you find anything?'

Delia shook her head. 'Only a Mandrel - and it nearly found me. The Crew
are still hunting them.'

'Well, the Doctor must be somewhere. What about you, K9?'
'Negative, Mistress. I have scanned the ship and there is no trace -' K9 broke

off. 'Correction, Mistress. The Doctor has just come on board. This way, please!'
K9 moved off.
As oxygen hissed info the shuttlecraft cabin, the Doctor opened his eyes

and saw Dymond removing his helmet and climbing out of the pilot seat.
Uncoiling his cramped limbs, the Doctor climbed out of his hiding place

and left the cabin.
Cautiously he slipped through the airlock and off after Dymond.



12. The Smugglers

On the bridge, Fisk was still grappling with Tryst's new theory. If the Doctor
did go into this projection, he's got to come out of it sometime. Check the VIP
lounge, Costa, I'll join you there in a moment.'

Unholstering his blaster, Costa hurried away. Fisk turned back to Tryst.
'What puzzles me is, why would the Doctor want to go into the projection?'

Tryst shrugged. 'To escape from you, that is one reason. But I believe there
is another, more urgent one. My theory is that one of the crew on my expedition,
a man called Stott, found a new source of the drug Vraxoin on the planet Eden.
He must have placed a supply of the drug inside the projection, and the Doctor
has gone to collect it. That is why he came on board in the first place.'

Tryst leaned forward persuasively. 'That is your own brilliant theory, is it
not?'

'Yes ... yes, as a matter of fact it is,' said Fisk, who now firmly believed
he'd thought up the whole idea. 'But in that case, why did the Doctor bother to
separate the ships?'

'Once the accident had occurred, it provided a useful cover, an ideal way to
divert suspicion. After all, the Doctor is a particularly cunning criminal...'

Thanks to K9's sensors, Romana was »oon en^'J LA joyful reunion with the
Doctor. 'But where were you Doctor. What happened to you?'

'I got caught up in a matter interface when the ships separated. Luckily I
managed to get through it and I ended up on the Hecate '

'Halt Stay where you are!' Two security guards appeared at the far end of
the corridor. A blaster bolt whizzed over their heads.

K9 fired back and a guard fell, stunned.
'Quick, run for it!' shouted the Doctor.
They ran, all except Delia. Since she hadn't actually done anything wrong,

she saw no reason to run away.
The other security guard hurried up, covering her with his blaster. 'Those

two are wanted criminals. What were you doing with them?'
'Oh, just finding out a few things,' said Delia coolly.
'You'd better come and tell Officer Fisk all about it. He'll be interested.'
The guard marched Delia away.
Satisfied they'd shaken off pursuit, at least for the moment, the Doctor and

Romana slowed to a walk as K9 caught up with them.
'Bit uncivil of them waving guns at us like that,' complained the Doctor.
'According to Delia, they've got orders to shoot on sight.'
The Doctor didn't seem bothered. Tell me, what would you use an encoder

laser for?'
'Sending telecom messages. An encoder can carry thousands of them.'
'Could it transmit a CET projection crystal?'

Romana considered. 'Like Tryst's you mean? Yes, theoretically. Why?'
'Because Dymond's got a CET machine on board the Hecate - with an

encoder laser attachment.'
'So Tryst and Dymond must be the smugglers?'



It looks like it. The problem will be convincing Fisk, he's convinced it's us.
We should have to catch them more or less in the act of transferring Vraxoin.'

'Someone approaching, Master,' warned K9.
The someone was Stott, who was retreating before an attacking Mandrel,

firing as he came.
'Stand aside, Stott,' called the Doctor. 'Leave it to K9.'
Stott flattened himself against the wall, K9 fired, and fired again, and the

Mandrel fell.
Stott bolstered his blaster. 'Nice to see you again, Doctor. What happened

to you?'
'Never mind about that now. We've found out who the smugglers are.

Dymond is the pick-up man and the smuggler is Tryst himself. The Vraxoin
source is on the Eden crystal, as you thought. They're going to transfer it to the
Hecate by encoder laser.'

'You've actually found the source? I searched for ages. What is it?'
'Roast Mandrel,' said the Doctor solmenly. 'One of them attacked me in the

power unit, crashed into a live circuit and got electrocuted. It burned down into
a fine grey powder.'

'A powder? You don't mean '
'Oh yes I do Vraxoin!'
Stott shook his head in astonishment. 'No wonder I couldn't find the source.

And they're actually planning to make the transference between ships with an
encoder laser? How are you going to prove it?'

The Doctor smiled. 'I'm going to let them do it!'
The guard marched Delia along a corridor towards the bridge, around a

corner and straight into a roaming Mandrel.
Delia screamed and jumped back, the guard fired and missed, and the

Mandrel struck him down. Delia ran along the corridor and into the control room
- where she found Dymond and Tryst, who was just climbing into a spacesuit
taken from one of the lockers on the bridge.

'There is a Mandrel out there.' gasped Delia.
'Its all right,' said Tryst soothingly. 'Our friend Dymond has a gun.'
Drawing his blaster, Dymond moved to cover the door.
Suddenly Delia realised what Tryst was doing. Whats happening? Surely

you weren't thinking of leaving the ship? You've got to stay and help the Doctor.
He warned you the CET machine was unstable. You've got to help him to get
the Mandrels back into projection.'

'Is that what tha Doctor plans to do?'
Tyrst smiled, 'Then in that case, I shall be right behind him.'
TheDoctor was bending over the CETmachine in theVIP lounge, replacing

the controls he had removed earner. Just as he finished, Fisk's voice came from
behind him. 'Put your hands up. Doctor!'

The Doctor turned. Fisk and Costa were standing in the doorway, armed
guards behind them.

The Doctor sighed. 'You are arresting the wrong person, you know'
Fisk drew his blaster. 'Thats enough out of you Doctor. One false move and

you'll be shot trying to escape - and personally I'd be just as pleased'
Another voice said 'Stop!'



Fisk looked up. To his utter astonishment he saw Stott walk out of the Eden
projection into the lounge.

'Who are you?'
Stott tossed him his identity plaque. 'Major Stott, Space Intelligence. The

Doctor's helping me. Tryst and Dymond are the ones you want.'
On the bridge, Delia was becoming increasingly suspicious. There was

something very odd about Tryst's manner. As they talked he went on adjusting
his space suit, fastening the seals.

Suddenly Delia remembered what the Doctor had told her. 'Professor Tryst
- Stott is still alive.'

A very ugly expression came over Tryst's face. 'Alive? He can't be!'
In the doorway, Dymond suddenly swung his gun to cover Delia.
Delia herself was staring at Tryst with sudden realisation. 'You fired that

shot, didn't you. It was you, that last day on Eden...'
Tryst seemed to quail before her anger. 'Believe me, I didn't want to do it.

He forced me.'
'And you're smuggling the Vraxoin. It was you all along.'
It started just as a temporary measure, Delia. To help me with my financial

difficulties. The cost of the expeditions was rising all the time, it was bankrupting
me. When I stumbled upon the actual source of Vraxoin, the temptation was too
great.'

Delia was horrified. 'But Vraxoin! A drug thats destroyed people by the
millions. How could you?'

'I had to continue my researches,' pleaded Tryst. 'Without me, many of the
creatures we found might have become extinct.'

'Don't you think all those addicts becoming extinct is rather more serious?'
'But they had a choice,' explained Tryst earnesty. 'It's their own fault if they

choose to become addicted. I didn't force them.'
'Like Rigg, I suppose? Did he have a choice?'
'That wasmost unfortunate. The dose was intended for the girl Romana. She

had seen the insect come out of the projection, she could prove it was unstable.
I thought if she became confused, unwell, no one would believe her.'

Dymond raised his blaster. 'I'm sorry about this Delia - but it's necessary .. .'
Delia looked at him unbelievingly, scarcely able to realise that he was about

to shoot her. Suddenly a Mandrel lurched roaring onto the bridge.
Dymond swung round and fired, hitting it in the shoulder. The Mandrel

screamed with rage and returned to the attack.
'Kill it,' shouted Tryst.
Dymond dodged the enraged Mandrel and fired again. 'Kill it? I can't even

stop it!'
Seizing her chance, Delia ran for the door.
'Tryst, help me,' screamed Dymond.
Tryst drew a blaster from beneath the spacesuit and added his fire to

Dymond's. Between them they managed to kill the enraged Mandrel at last.
As it thudded to the ground Tryst looked round. 'Delia's gone. Get after her!'
Dymond ran from the bridge and Tryst hurried over to the communications

console. Raising his blaster, he wrecked the controls with one long savage burst.



Delia ran terror-stricken down the long corridor from the bridge. She turned
the corner - and found her way barred by an approaching Mandrel.

She turned and ran back the way she had come -and Dymond appeared at
the other end of the corridor. He raised his blaster and fired.



13. Round up

Clutching her shoulder, Delia twisted in the energy-beam of the blaster and
fell to the ground.

Romana and K9 appeared from a side corridor and saw Delia's fallen body,
Dymond at the end of the corridor with the blaster still in his hand.

'After him, K9!' shouted Romana. 'Don't let him get away!'
K9 set off after Dymond while Romana ran to Delia's body Delia opened

her eyes and moaned.
Suddenly Romana heard the roar of an attacking Mandrel close behind her.
K9 heard it too. Abandoning his pursuit of Dymond, he spun around and

glided back to help Romana.
As the creature drew back its paw to strike, a well-aimed blast from K9's

laser sent it screaming down the corridor.
'Mission to capture escaping criminal aborted, Mistress,' said K9

apologetically. 'Your protection has a higher priority in my programming.'
'Don't apologise,' gasped Romana. 'That was close!'
Two metres to be precise. Mistress,' agreed K9.
The Doctor came running up the corridor. 'I heard firing. What happened?'
'K9 shot a Mandrel, and Dymond shot Delia,' explained Romana.
The Doctor knelt to examine Delia. 'She'll be all right. The range must have

been too great, she's only stunned.' He straightened up. 'Callous wretches,
Dymond and Tryst. Still, we'll see they get what they deserve. They'll be making
the energy transfer any minute now.'

Dymond and Tryst were running frantically for the shuttle bay. Suddenly
an announcement blared from the ship's loudspeakers. 'All security personnel!
Locate and detain Pilot Dymond and passenger Tryst. They may be attempting
to leave the ship. Previous orders regarding the Doctor and his companion are
now cancelled.'

'They're on to us,' said Tryst 'It's come sooner than I thought.'
Dymond said, 'We'd better get a move on. Even if we get clear, they'll have

interceptor craft after us.'
Tryst smiled. 'I doubt that. I smashed the communicator. They're cut off

from Azure control.'
They hurried into the shuttle bay.
Stott and Fisk were on the bridge, surveying the wrecked communication

console.
'There's no way I can call up help now,' said Fisk. 'If we don't get them

before they leave the ship, we've lost them!'
'We could chase them in the Empress,' suggested Stott.
'With no pilot, no navigator, and a damaged power unit? Could you fly her?'
Stott shook his head.
The Doctor, Romana and K9 came onto the bridge. 'Once more into the

breach, gentlemen,' said the Doctor cheerily. 'What's happened? why such long
faces?'

'Tryst and Dymond have got away,' said Stott gloomily.



The Doctor sat down at the controls. 'They won't go without the Eden
crystal,' he said confidently.

That gives us a little time.'
To do what?'
'Well, now that the ships are separated, we can stabilise the projection -

which means we can clear the marauding menagerie of Mandrels back where
they came from. Which is exactly where Tryst and Dymond want them,
incidentally.'

'So why are we giving them what they want?'
The Doctor looked at him in surprise. 'We've got to bait the hook first, my

dear chap. How else will we catch the fish? Now, let's see how your security
chaps are getting on, shall we?'

The shuttlecraft left the Empress and floated towards the Hecate, Dymond
and Tryst were on their way.

On board the Empress, operation Mandrel was under way. A thorough
check established that there were only about half a dozen of the creatures still
roaming the ship. The rest had been dealt with by a combination of Fisk's security
guards, armed crewmen, and a number of passengers who had insisted on being
given arms.

Now the surviving Mandrels were being driven towards the VIP lounge by
Stott and a squad of security guards. On the Doctor's instructions, the blasters
were set to stun, and were being used to prod the snarling Mandrels along the
corridors.

'Keep themmoving,' ordered Stott. 'They're more dangerous in a group. We
should join up with Fisk and his squad soon.'

At the next junction they encountered Fisk, more guards, and several more
angry Mandrels. Soon the combined group of Mandrels, about a dozen in all,
was being herded down the corridor to the VIP lounge.

The Doctor came down the corridor to meet them. 'Well done. This way,
gentlemen, this way!'

Suddenly a kind of group madness seemed to seize the Mandrels. Roaring
and snarling, they turned on their captors, slashing at them with their ferocious
claws, ignoring the stinging of the blasters.

The panic-stricken security guards fell back.
'We can't hold them, Doctor!' shouted Stott.
The corridor was suddenly filled with amob of shouting guards and roaring,

snarling Mandrels.
The Doctor surveyed the scene in horror. 'Oh no!' Suddenly he had an

inspiration. Fishing out his dog-whistle, he put it to his lips and began playing
a silent tune.

Whatever he was playing, and whatever strange key and unknown
frequency he was playing it in, the result was extraordinary, at least as far as the
Mandrels were concerned.

Suddenly docile, they stopped their savage attack and cocked their great
shaggy heads as if listening to the sweetest music.

The howls and snarls were replaced by a low contented growling that might
have been purring.



The astonished guards fell back and the Mandrels lurched towards the
Doctor, following himmeekly down the corridor, across the VIP lounge and into
the Eden projection, where it glowed on the wall.

Stott, Romana and all the others watched in astonishment as the Doctor and
his strange flock vanished into the jungle.

There was a moment of total silence.
Suddenly there came a savage Mandrel roar, and the Doctor shot out of the

jungle and came hurtling out of the projection.
'Turn it off,' he yelled. 'Turn it off!'
Romana ran to the CET machine and switched it off.
The wall went dark.
The Mandrels were imprisoned in their miniature world once more.
The Doctor collapsed gasping on a couch.
'Well, Doctor,' said Fisk ironically. 'What now?'
The Doctor waved him aside. 'Romana?'
'Yes, Doctor?'
'We've got two minutes and fifty-eight seconds to take this machine apart

and rebuild it - starting from now!'
Romana stared at him. 'This machine, Doctor? Tryst's CET machine?'
'That's right.'
'Are you joking?'
'Do I look as if I'm joking?'
Romana sighed. 'I'll need a screwdriver.'
The Doctor produced his sonic screwdriver and handed it to her.
Romana said, 'All right, Doctor. What do you want me to do?'
In the cabin of the Hecate, Tryst was adjusting the angle of the encoder

laser, attached to his duplicate CET machine.
'How does it look?' asked Dymond.
'Couldn't be better! Are you ready to get us out of here as soon as I've made

the transfer?'
Dymond nodded. 'It's all preset. I've switched control through to the

computer. All I've got to do is press that button.' He nodded towards the computer
console keyboard. 'All right. I'm almost ready .. .'

Tryst switched on the CET machine, and rows of lights blinked on its
control console.

In the VIP lounge, the Doctor and Romana were working at frantic speed.
'Increase the gain on the matrix modulator,' ordered the Doctor.

Romana adjusted a circuit. 'Up five points.'
The Doctor shook his head. 'It's not enough, we need more power.'
'We could put jump leads on K9,' suggested Romana.
'Good idea! Here, K9, come and put your leads on.'
Obediently K9 glided forward. Romana attached leads from the CET

machine to his antennae. 'All connected, K9?'
'Affirmative, Mistress.'
Stott and Costa were looking on in astonishment. 'Doctor, what are you

trying to achieve?' asked Stott.
'To put it briefly, we're trying to increase the range and power of this rather

ramshackle machine. How many points now Romana?'



'Ten and building, with K9's help.'
That's more like it. I think we're going to be all right!'
The Doctor reached inside the machine to make a final adjustment.

Suddenly a beam of violet light shot through the hull of the ship and connected
with the machine, making it hum with life.

The Doctor gave a yelp of pain and snatched back his hand.
'Doctor, are you all right,' asked Romana.
The Doctor blew on his fingers. 'Just a bit of a shock.'
The eerie violet light played over the machine.
Stott looked at Romana. 'What's happening?'
'It's from the Hecate - they're making the transfer,' she whispered.
'That means we've lost, they can get away!'
'Quiet,' snapped the Doctor. 'Romana, reverse the setting on the

transmutation matrix!'
Romana hesitated.
'It's all right,' said the Doctor. 'It's quite safe.'
Suddenly the violet beam of the encoder laser cut out.
Romana looked at the Doctor. 'Surely it's too late now. They've already

made the transfer.'
'Romana, will you please reverse the setting on the transmutation matrix.'
Muttering to herself, Romana obeyed.
The Doctor turned to K9. 'Track the Hecate for me, please. Give me her

exact co-ordinates.'
'Affirmative, Master.'
The Doctor leaned over the machine and operated the rejigged controls.
In the cabin of the Hecate, Tryst completed a careful check of his duplicate

CET machine. 'It's all here, all safely transferred. We've done it, Dymond. Now
get us out of here!'

Dymond reached for the computer keyboard and pressed a switch. The
Hecate' engines roared into life.

The survey ship streaked off into the blackness of deep space.
K9 was calling out the Hecate's co-ordinates. '47.3 vector 799 - in seven

seconds.'
'47.3 vector 799. You'd better be right, K9.' You'd better be right, K9.'
The Doctor counted off the last few seconds, then threw the switch.
For a moment the room seemed to blurr and shimmer, then everything

returned to normal. 'Good!' said the Doctor happily.
'What happened?' demanded Stott.
The Doctor patted the CET machine. 'Ever heard the expression "hoist with

his own petard?" Refers to a kind of early bomb. It was so unreliable it often
blew up the man who was using it. Something very similar's happened here.'

Fisk came storming into the room. 'I've just come from the bridge, Doctor.
Our instruments show that the Hecate is now in deep space, well beyond reach.
Whatever your plan was, it has failed miserably. There's absolutely no way we
can catch them now!'



14. Electronic Zoo

TheDoctor rose, yawned, stretched, and slapped the furious Fisk heartily on
the back. 'On the contrary, my dear chap, I've already caught them.' He touched
a control on the CET machine and the cabin of the Hecate appeared on the wall
screen, complete with Dymond and Tryst staring out of the screen in
astonishment.

The Doctor waved expansively at the screen. 'There you are - all yours!
Trapped in their own electronic zoo.'

'But ... but ... but ...' spluttered Fisk.
'What did you do, Doctor?' asked Stott.
'All I did was increase the range of this machine here. Then I used it to bring

them back. Matter transmutation, you see! Since the projection is still unstable,
all you have to do is pluck them out!'

Fisk waved to his guards. 'You heard the Doctor. Go and - pluck them out!'
The astonished guards went gingerly into the projection, seized the even

more astonished Tryst and Dymond and dragged them out into the lounge.
Dymond let himself be marched out in sullen, silence, but Tryst dragged his
guards to a halt before the Doctor.

'Doctor, please, I never wanted to be involved in all this. Tell them I only did
it for the sake of science, for the sake of funding my research. You understand!
don't you, Doctor? You're a scientist too...'

The Doctor gave him a brief glance of utter contempt. 'Go away, Tryst. Just
- go away.'

Still protesting, Tryst was dragged out by the guards.
Tryst was the worst kind of criminal of all, reflected the Doctor, the kind

who sincerely believes that however appalling his crimes, there is always a
perfectly valid excuse.

A short time later, the Doctor, Romana and K9 were saying goodbye to
Stott and Delia outside the TARDIS.

Relays of shuttlecraft were ferrying indignant passengers down to the
delights of Azure, and the Doctor had decided to sneak away before Fisk could
involve him in his unending series of enquiries.

'How are you feeling now, Delia,' asked the Doctor.
I'm fine, now that the nightmare is over.'
Stott smiled and put his arm around her protectively.
The Doctor held up a laser crystal. 'The nightmare is safely imprisoned here

- in the Eden crystal'
Romana held up a whole case of crystals. 'And here's the rest of Tryst's

electronic zoo.'
Delia flushed. 'It was never meant for a zoo. It really was a conservation

exercise - for some of us.' She smiled up at Stott.
The Doctor said, 'I think the best way of conserving the poor creatures

imprisoned in these crystals would be to project them back to their home planets,
don't you?'



Delia nodded eagerly. 'Oh yes!' Then her face fell. 'But you've already
dismantled the CET machines.'

Romana smiled. 'Don't worry, we've got some very sophisticated projection
equipment in the TARDIS.'

'Do it in no time - literally!'
'What about the Mandrels, Doctor?' asked Stott. 'They are the source of the

Vraxoin, after all.'
'That isn't their fault, is it? TheMandrels have a perfect right to exist too, on

their own planet and in their own way. You must quarantine Eden, Major Stott,
make sure no one else discovers the secret.'

Stott nodded grimly. 'Don't worry, Doctor, we'll take care of it. The
Mandrels will be able to live in peace for evermore.'

Romana looked down at the rack of crystals. 'You know, I can only think
of one animal who'd be happy in an electronic zoo!'

'What's that?' asked Delia.
Romana looked down at K9 and smiled. 'I don't think it would be tactful

to tell you - do you, K9?'
'Negative, Mistress,' said K9 huffily, and glided into the TARDIS.
The Doctor and Romana said their goodbyes and followed him.
Stott and Delia turned and walked off down the corridor. A few seconds

later they heard a strange wheezing, groaning sound.
They turned to look, but the corridor was empty.
The TARDIS was on its way to new adventures.

Revision Notes:
Initial Scan by ST7

Ver 1.0: Converted to html and proofread by ST7



Table of Contents
2. The Collector
3. The Attack
4. Monster in the Fog
5. Drugged
6. The Fugitive
7. The Rescuer
8. Man-eater
9. Monster Attack
10. The Plotters
12. The Smugglers
13. Round up
14. Electronic Zoo