DOCTORWHO
AND THE LEISURE HIVE

By DAVID FISHER

Based on the BBC television serial Doctor Who by David Fisher by
arrangement with the British Broadcasting Corporation



1. Brighton

The deckchair attendant shivered in the cold wind off the sea, and cursed
fof the thousandth time yet another chilly English June. It was going to rain again
any minute, he complained to his friend the candyfloss seller. That's all they
needed to complete a perfectly miserable day. Anyone with a ha'porth of sense
was sure to be in the cinemas or the pubs or the amusement arcades. The beach
was deserted. Who'd be fool enough to rent a deckchair in weather like this?

He pulled his coat collar up round his ears, leaned on the iron balustrade of
the promenade, and surveyed the row of beach huts.

Then something caught his eye.
That was odd. There was a police box at the end of the row of beach huts.

Funny he'd never noticed it before. And he thought he knew Brighton beach like
the back of his hand. What was a police box doing on the sand? Didn't make
sense. Coppers'd get their feet wet when the tide came in.

In front of the police box he could see a deckchair. Not one of his
unfortunately - wrong colour-so perhaps they'd brought it with them. And there
was a fellow slumped in the chair, with a brightly coloured beachball and a
buckel and space by his side. He was wearing an overcoat, a large hat pulled
over his eyes, and a long scarf wrapped round his neck. The deckchair attendant
approved. Very sensible way to dress for a day on beach. Thats what makes this
country great, he thought nostalgically - a steadfast refusal to be deterred by facts.
You come to the seaside for the day and, regardless of whether there's six feet of
snow along the prom and icebergs are floating down from Hove, regardless of
the fact that you're cold, miserable and your boots are beginning to let in water,
you come and sit on the beach. Even if it kills you. And with this wind it probably
will.

Wait a minute. There was someone else out there. A girl. And what looked
like-no, it couldn't be. He could have sworn it was a metal fox terrier. A new
breed, perhaps.

Mind you, he said to his friend the candyfloss seller, when you consider
miniature dachshunds, I suppose anything's possible.

The Doctor was sulking, Romana decided. He couldn't possibly be asleep -
not in this freezing wind. He'd got the co-ordinates of the TARD1S all wrong yet
again and just because she had remarked on this-in a perfectly friendly manner-
he had gone into a huff. She picked up a stone and threw it violently into the
slate-coloured sea.

There must be somewhere in this whole galaxy,' she remarked to K9, 'where
one can enjoy a proper holiday without being frozen to death.'

There is, mistress.'
'I'm delighted to hear it.'
Taking this as an invitation to exercise his memory banks, K9 began to

recall the list of recreational facilities available on the galaxy over a period of
two or three thousand years.

Romana picked up the beachball and disconsolately began to bounce it.



'Yegros-alpha,' droned K9, approaching the end of the list. 'Speciality -
atavistic therapy of primitive asteroid. Zaakros: galaxy's largest flora collection,
including 819 carnivorous species. Zeen-4: historical re-enactments—'

Re-enactments?'
'You choose what episode in history you want to see re-enacted or take part

in yourself. One proviso, however.'
'What?'
'Re-enactment of twentieth century Earth history forbidden: considered to

be too violent.'
'Quite right,' said Romana, angrily smacking the beachball, so that it

bounced head high. 'That's always the problem with Earth. They never do
anything constructive.'

'Sea bathing, mistress.'
'?'
'Traditional Earth exercise when at the seaside.'
'You try it then,' said Romana. She threw the beachball into the sea. 'Fetch.'
The brightly coloured ball bobbed about in the surf about ten yards out.

Obedient as ever, K9 trundled down the damp sand and into the water.
There was a loud hiss. A flash. A cloud of blue smoke. And K9 began to

sink as seawater seeped through the joins in his metal skin.
'Oh, no! K9!' called Romana. 'I'm coming!' She took off her shoes and

plunged into the surf.
The Doctor woke up to discover an indignant Romana, with wet feet and a

sorry-looking K9 in her arms, standing over him.
'Look what you've done!' she stormed. 'You've not only got our holiday

dates wrong-you've forgotten to update the programme for K9's seawater
defences. He's water-logged.'

She shook the dog-shaped computer. The Doctor could hear water sloshing
around inside the metal animal. But he had problems of his own.

'It's the second time I've missed the opening of the Brighton Pavilion,' he
complained.

'What are you going to do about K9?' demanded Romana.
'I'll fix him some time.' The Doctor yawned. 'It's this sea air,' he explained

apologetically. 'Oh, well, I'll try setting the co-ordinates again.'
He rose to his feet and began to fold up his deckchair.
I've got a better idea,' said Romana. 'Before he got soaked K9 gave me a

complete list of recreational facilities in this galaxy.'
The Doctor was struggling with the deckchair and didn't reply. He had

always liked Earth; it was his favourite planet. But he had to admit that some
of their artefacts, like deckchairs and motor mowers and telephones, seemed to
be designed with malice aforethought - rather than with the intention of making
life easier for everyone. There was, he reflected, a streak of technological sadism
amongst Earthlings.

'I like the sound of Argolis.'
'Argolis?' the Doctor muttered indistinctly. He was sucking his finger,

having squashed it in the wooden frame of the deckchair.
'First of the Leisure Planets. With a recreational centre called the Leisure

Hive. And an Experiential Grid.'



'What's that when it's at home?' enquired the Doctor.
It offers variable environments designed to stimulate physical, psychic and

intellectual regeneration,' explained Romana, parroting K9.
'Sounds like Morecambe on a bad day... Ow!'
'Oh, give me that.' Romana put down K9 and disentangled the Doctor from

the deckchair, which she then neatly folded up. 'Come on,' she said. 'Argolis next
stop.'

She entered the TARDIS followed by the Doctor, grumbling, with K9
tucked under his arm.

The deckchair attendant rubbed his eyes. 'I don't believe it,' he said to his
friend the candyfloss seller. 'That police box. It's just vanished.'

'Flaming hooligans,' replied the other gloomily. 'That's who I blame. And
comprehensive education. And free school milk. I knew it'd end badly.'

'You don't understand,' protested the deckchair attendant. 'It vanished.
Disappeared. Into thin air.'

But the candyfloss seller wasn't listening. He had just spotted a lone
Japanese tourist burdened with cameras and three small children and it was a
well-known fact in Brighton that the Japanese found candyfloss irresistible.



2. Argolis

Nothing prepared you for the miracle of Argolis. Everyone's first reaction
on arriving on the planet was the same-sheer gawping wonder. Even the most
experienced space travellers were reduced to open-mouthed bumpkins, unable
to believe their eyes.

One of the great hyperspace lines brought you into the orbit of the planet.
There you changed to a shuttle in which you descended to the surface. On
landing, you pressed the button on the android stewardess, which automatically
signed you off the shuttle's passenger log, then you stepped out of the craft onto
a moving hover pavement. Thjs carried you gently, silently, up a long tunnel,
the walls of which were a uniform dove grey. The tunnel was suffused with a
subdued light. The effect was faintly claustrophobic, But not for long. It wasn't
enough to cause any distress. At last the pavement deposited you in the first great
observation hall of the Leisure Hive.

The contrast with the tunnel was breathtaking. It was like emerging from
a womb and stepping onto an immense stage. All around you was glass. You
stood inside a huge inverted bowl. Outside you could see the pitted surface of
the planet stretching away to the horizon, while overhead arched an immensity
of sky. The effect was as if you had been suddenly immersed in a sea of light and
colour. Brilliant light Incredible colour No rainbows anywhere in the galaxy ever
boasted such colours. They flowed over the observation hall in endless, ever-
changing waves.

It was only later, when you learned something of the history of the planet,
that you realized that the colours which you found so intoxicating were the
colours of death... The death of the planet...

Warfare came as naturally as breathing to the Argolin-and about as early
in their history. The moment the first hairy, vaguely humanoid creature stood
upright on the surface of the planet he grasped in his hand a flint. Before long
he discovered how to chip one side of the stone, so that it became as sharp as a
razor. Next he tied the flint securely to a heavy stick. Whereupon he promptly
struck another Argolin over the head with it.

Thus the first Argolin battleaxe was invented.
Other inventions followed —the spear, the bow, the laser pistol, the

intercontinental missile.
Of course not all the other tribes on the planet were equally warlike. Mostly

they were quite peaceful. Too busy for war, they occupied themselves inventing
such things as the wheel, music, antiseptic surgical techniques, and agriculture.

Since the Argolin were only a small tribe, the others tended to ignore them,
or at least keep out of their way if that was possible. And then someone (a non-
Argolin) invented a reliable means of transport, and it wasn't. Once the Argolin
could move freely about the planet, then, like lice or the common cold, they
began to crop up everywhere.

It was therefore only a matter of time before their warriors subdued all the
other tribes. Once established as masters of their world, they immediately
renamed it-with typical arrogance-after themselves. (Until then it had been



known as Xxbrmm after which almost anything was an improvement.) For a
century or two the Argolin teetered uneasily on the brink of peace. They were at
a loose end: they had killed or enslaved all the other tribes; what else was there
left for them to conquer?

Peace was an anathema. Peace was against the Argolin ethos. Peace was
bad for you: it made you flabby, weakened your moral fibre, and rotted your
teeth. Peace must be avoided at all costs.

The problem was-how? With no one left to fight, what alternative was
there?

A group of Argolin elders discussed the matter for a decade or two. Then
they came up with a solution which, typical of the race, was both practical and
absurd. They evolved a complex and quite useless set of rules and rituals which
were intended to govern every aspect of their lives. It was decreed that anArgolin
should wear certain colours on a particular day, eat certain foods, wash himself
or herself in a particular manner, wear certain insignias, and so on. Their entire
life was to be devoted to keeping up with those ever-changing rituals. Failure
to observe them, no matter how ludicrous they might be, came to be regarded
as an insult by another Argolin. Insults could only be exculpated through mortal
combat, which was conducted under another set of complex rituals.

The tournament and the duel therefore became a substitute for war. Indeed,
it became a way of life, or death, for every adult Argolin. They killed each other
with an enthusiasm and determination the subject races could only applaud.

At the height of what came to be called the Golden Age of Heroic Combat
most male Argolin had at least a dozen duels pending, not to mention various
courtly tournaments at which they were expected to shed blood, their own, or
someone else's. Female Argolin were not forgotten either. Once past childbeanng
age, theywere required to avenge the slights and insults accumulated over twenty
years. Awoman could inherit a backlog of a hundred ormore unfought duels, and
she was expected to devote her declining years to fighting them. Those elderly
females who survived tended to be scarred veterans of numberless combats, and
were used to frighten Argolin children instead of the traditional bogeyman.

The principles of chivalry and the exploits of Argolin heroes were
celebrated in a thousand ballads and verse sagas, with which Argolin knights
were wont to regale themselves whilst recovering from wounds, or merely
resting between tournaments.

The Saga of Herell the Hapless and Mako the Mighty was typical of the
genre. Herell, a young knight newly initiated into the rituals of chivalry, was
challenged to a duel by Mako, a one-legged giant. He had lost his leg several
years before in a previous duel. Herell decided the odds were unfair. Not only
was Mako ten years his senior, but since the chosen weapons were to be huge
two-handed swords, Mako's lack of mobility placed him at an immediate
disadvantage.

Only the most agile could hope to succeed with such weapons. Before the
moment of combat Herell therefore hewed off his own left leg and, sword in both
hands, hopped painfully towards his opponent. When Mako's squire pointed out
that his master was minus a right leg and the advantage was still not equally
balanced, Herell angrily struck off his other leg and prepared to fight on two



bloody stumps. Mako, not to be outdone, cut off his own left leg. Both
combatants died of shock and loss of blood without striking a blow at each other.

This was regarded as one of the most glorious moments of Argolin chivalry.
Just when it seemed possible that the Argolin might — unaided - wipe

themselves off the face of the planet, someone (a non-Argolin) discovered the
means of interplanetary flight. The surviving Argolin could breathe again. At
last they could devote themselves to conquest. They stopped killing each other
and occupied themselves with killing the inhabitants of other planets-according
to the strictest rules of Argolin chivalry, of course.

Their conquests continued until they came across a race as warlike as their
own.

The Foamasi were green and scaly, reptilian in appearance, vaguely
resembling man-sized lizards. Like the Argolin, they too dominated their
environment by sheer aggressiveness. Unlike the Argolin, however, they did not
develop into a knightly, aristocratic society. Cold-blooded, more numerous than
the humanoids, the individual in Foamasi society was less important than the
clan, the extended family. It was the clan against the world. One family pitted its
wits and its members against another, winner take all, no quarter given or asked.

The only rules were those of the jungle. Kill or be killed; eat or wind up as
the shish kebab. Every Foamasi enjoyed complete existential freedom of action.
Nothingwas forbidden: no act of violencewas too extreme. He could do anything
he liked to anyone else, just as long as they were not members of his own
extended family. The family was sacred. For good reason; they were often your
only protection against other Foamasi.

The consequence of this was that no Foamasi ever dinedwith a non-member
of his family unless he carried with him the full range of poison antidotes in
Pharmocopoeia and wore a suit of titanium alloy chain mail, guaranteed proof
against any weapon or projectile short of an artillery shell.

In place of the Argolin knight, that faintly ludicrous figure sans peur sans
reproche, the Foamasi found their folk heroes amongst professional hit men:
assassins. The poisoner, the strangler, the wielder of the fastest electric stiletto,
were celebrated in song and story.

Since they were an intensely competitive race by nature, it is not perhaps
surprising that the Foamasi formalized their natural predeliction for sudden
death. Murder came to be regarded not only as one of the fine arts, along with
water sculpture and aural architecture, but also the sport of kings and the
entertainment of the crowd. Television helped. The big festivals were televised.
Even minor inter-family competitions were followed with avid interest.
Inevitablywagers weremade on the result, and before long several Foamasi clans
moved in and organized gambling on a planetary scale. Thus began a division
of the race into two different branches, the punters and the bookies, those who
bet and those who organized the betting: what came to be called the White and
Black Foamasi - although this had nothing whatsoever to do with scale colour,
since all Foamasi were uniformly green.

Sharing one galaxy, it was only a matter of time before the Argolin and
the Foamasi met. And once that occurred it took them precisely six minutes to
become locked in pointless, hopeless combat.



The excuse for the war - not that either side really needed one - was a minor
asteroid which lay roughly halfway between Argolin and Foamasi territory. This
chunk of space dirt held together by frozen methane was only thirty kilometres
in diameter, and known to be useless as an outpost and valueless as a source of
mineral wealth. Nonetheless both sides laid claim to it.

The Argolin sent a ship to establish a garrison on the place. So did the
Foamasi. The two ships met on collision course in orbit around the asteroid.
The Argolin commander demanded that the Foamasi vessel change course. The
Foamasi captain insisted that if anyone was to change course it must be the
Argolin. Before the question could be resolved one way or the other the two ships
struck head on. The resulting fireball melted the frozen methane and vaporised
several kilotons of space debris and destroyed the asteroid. It also caused a war.

It must be admitted that the war between Argolis and Foamas was not the
most destructive on record. On a scale of I to 12 according to the Shebunken
Formula, which was devised by Prof. Igor Shebunken of the University of New
Caledonia to measure the destructiveness of international or interplanetary
conflict, the Argolin-Foamasi War scored a mere 10.3, somewhere below total
destruction and above the semi-genocidal level.

Seventeen hundred and sixty-two Argolin struck the planet of Foamas,
reducing it to a burned crisp. A red-hot cinder incapable of supporting even
calorific bacteria. The two thousand or so Foamasi missiles which struck Argolis
didn't have quite the same effect. True, the missiles burned off the surface of the
planet and hurled the debris into the stratosphere. There, owing to gravitational
forces, the dust remained. Ultra-violet light from Argolis' four suns turned the
dust into a veritable symphony of colour.

Amillion rainbows, perpetually shifting, forming a&nd re-forming, glowed
with jewelled splendour over the desert that was now the planet Argolis.

The Argolin, those who survived, were not slow to take advantage of this.
They turned Argolis into the first of the Leisure Planets.

The time was ripe for such developments.
Thanks to the technological revolution of seventy-five years before, which

had freed the inhabitants of three-quarters of the galaxy from the necessity of
work, time began to hang heavy on everyone's hands (or whatever limbs they
were blessed with). War and crime seemed to provide the most popular
alternative to the agony of boredom. Then, just when it seemed that the whole
galaxy would descend into barbarism, Hyperion C. Blackadder, an Irish missile
research engineer working on Tethys, stumbled across the principle of
hyperspace drive. (Literally stumbled across it, in fact. He found himself on Io
before he realized what had happened, and spent the next four) years trying to
return to Tethys.) Blackadder's discovery revolutionized intergalactic travel. It
brought the farthest reaches of the galaxy within only a few days travelling time.
You could travel from Odin-3 to Xeros-9 in under a week.

Once it was discovered that there were few technical limits to the size of
vessels that could operate in hyperspace, the entrepreneurs moved in.
Intergalactic travel was soon open to every sensate being with enough
interplanetary credits to purchase a ticket. And so creatures from over forty
different star systems went traipsing around the galaxy in search of recreation,
good weather, and a really cheap holiday.



Many of them went to Argolis.
Because Argolis was special.
From inside the safety of the great glass Leisure Hive the planet was a

wonder to behold. Visitors never tired of sitting and watching the incredible ever
changing colours. It was as if nature had become painter and Argolis her canvas.

But it was a deceptive beauty. A dangerous beauty. The picture had to be
kept behind glass. Because the atmosphere of the planet was poisonous to most
forms of life in the galaxy. Almost nothing could breathe the air of Argolis and
survive. You could look; you could admire; but you couldn't walk the sands of
Argolis and draw in deep lungfuls of Argolin air.

When the tourists grew bored with the ever-changing colours, there was
always the Experiential Grid to entertain them-that masterpiece of Argolin
technology, the climax of a century of study of a theoretical sub-atomic particle,
the tachyon.

The irony of it was that in order to survive, the aristocratic knights of
Argolis, once the scourge of the galaxy, were now reduced to becoming tourist
guides to their own destroyed planeta job they performed with cheerless
efficiency.



3. Brock

The figure in the holograph was soberly suited and wore an air of restrained
gloom, like a high-class mortician. He was, in fact, the Terran business adviser
to Argblin Leisure Enterprises Inc. which, like so many galactic commercial
operations, was now registered for tax purposes on Terra.

Over the years Earth had transformed itself from a polluted, dying world
into a tax haven. (The Cayman Islands of the Galaxy, as one wag put it.) Its
population, reduced by a series of wars to under twenty million souls, had all
become accountants or service engineers for the tea-dispensing machines which
proliferated in Terran offices.

Augustus Brock spoke into the hyperspatial desk communicator in his
office in New Delphi. His holographic image was projected into the Council
Chamber of Argolis ninety-three light years away with only a slight time lag
caused by the inevitable hyperspace distortion.

Brock was one of Terra's top accountants. As such he was used to rapt
attention if not instant comprehension, as he picked over the entrails of some
commercial enterprise. He was not encouraging about Argolis.

'I must tell you that all our predictions, even those based on optimum
exploitation of existing facilities indicate a probable financial down-run.'

The four Argolin remained impassive. Not by the slightest change of
expression, not by the flicker of an emotion, did they reveal that they hadn't the
faintest idea what the accountant was talking about.

'And that,' went on the Terran, encouraged, 'Is the optimistic scenario.'
Pangol, the youngest member of the Argolin Council, glanced at his fellow

members with some irritation. You could take Argolin impassivity too far, he
thought. 'What's that mean in plain language?' he demanded.

'Bankruptcy.' The Terran turned away and played a brief arpeggio on the
keyboard of his computer. He checked the computer display and shook his head
sorrowfully. 'Indeed I will go further,' he said. 'Projection-wise, based on thirty
different economic scenarios provided by our business augury department-total
bankruptcy/

No one spoke.
Once again Brock looked round the Argolin Council, wondering if anyone

had taken in what he had said. He decided to repeat his prophecy: 'Total
bankruptcy.'

Morix, the senior member of the Council, spoke gently as if explaining
simple facts to a child. 'We've always known the Leisure Hive was expensive to
maintain,' he said. 'And it's true that last year's bookings were down—'

'They're even worse this year!'
' —but surely in the long run—'
'There won't be any long run,' said Brock. 'Don't you understand?' He took

a deep breath and plunged on. 'Shielding the Hive from radiation alone eats up
61.5 per cent of your income, even when you're booked solid the whole year
round. And for the past two years the Hive has been less than fully booked, even
in the high season. How much longer do you think you will be able to preserve



the integrity of the Hive? If the technical reports are to be believed, some of the
shielding is already due for replacement.'

'What about next year's bookings?'
'They could be mildly described as disastrous. They will amount to thirty

per cent or less of this year's bookings.'
Pangol stirred angrily in his chair. 'You are our booking agent as well as

our accountant,' he snapped. 'Bookings are your responsibility. If you are not up
to the task, we can always find ourselves another agent.'

Morix laid his hand on the youngman's arm. 'Calmly,' he admonished. 'With
dignity. Remember, we are Argolin.'

'Dignity!' cried Pangol. 'It is the Argolin disease.We needmore than dignity
in order to survive in the world.'

But Brock, who privately agreed with the young Argolin, refused to be
deflected from his argument. 'The facts,' he said, making a steeple of his fingers,
'do not suggest that any change of booking agency, advertising policy, or even
accountant will affect the trend.'

'I do not understand what has gone wrong,' complained Morix. 'After all we
were the first in the field of Leisure Planets.'

'Precisely,' agreed Brock. 'The glorious past is, I regret to say, as is so often
the case, past. Argolis is simply out of date. Other Leisure Planets have moved
with the times. They are constantly looking for new pleasures and delights for
their visitors.'

One by one he ticked them off on his fingers. 'Non-gravity swimming pools.
You can dive upwards or downwards into or out of the pool. Then there are
robotic gladiatorial games. Psychic gymnasia.

'Look,' he went on it's your planet. Make it more attractive to visitors and
they will flock here in their thousands-and keep coming back.'

'Easier said than done,' observed Morix.
He thought it ironic that the Argolin found it easier to conquer a galaxy than
to run a successful Leisure Planet. The practice of warfare demanded a
combination of skill and simple virtues ideally suited to the Argolin
temperament, whereas the management of people's leisure pursuits required
the adaptability of Robinson Crusoe combined with the diplomatic skills of
Machiavelli. As he was forced to admit to himself, the knights of Argolis
were totally unsuited to commerce.

'What other Leisure Planet has pioneered a whole new science?' demanded
Pangol.

'I suppose you're referring to tachyonics,' replied Brock. 'If you will
remember, each year I have pointed out to the Board that you simply cannot
continue to invest vast sums in research. The tachyon is a scientific curiosity,
nothing more.'

Pangol clenched his fists. The tachyon represented the Argolin holy of
holies, the one intellectual frontier they had made their own.

It was of course typical of the Argolin that they should have embraced
something as abstruse as the tachyon-which is a hypothetical particle first
propounded by Terran physicists in the twentieth century. Einstein's special
theory of relativity led many of them to the view that there was a yet



undiscovered particle possessed of the most extraordinary properties. This
particle, they theorised, only came into existence when it was already travelling
faster than the speed of light. On the face of it, this seemed to make nonsense
of Einstein's own theory, which proposed the velocity of light as a constant. But
the physicists suggested an ingenious solution to the problem.

One of the curious properties of this particle, they claimed, was that two
tachyons would be able to occupy the same space at the same moment in time-
with only the minimum of elbow-rubbing and general bad temper. Normally
in the world of physics such behaviour would result in a massive explosion. It
didn't in the case of the tachyon because the particle possessed either imaginary
momentum and energy or else imaginary mass. No one was quite sure which,
because no one had ever succeeded in isolating a tachyon and subjecting it to
any tests.

At least no one had done so until the Kromads, a nocturnal feathered race
with an interest in the vaguer reaches of theoretical physics, finally cornered
the bashful tachyon. In an experiment of remarkable elegance they fractionally
slowed up a number of the particles which then collided - and blew up their sun.
After which disaster no one, except the Argolin, was prepared to mess around
with tachyonics any more.

'Perhaps if there was a programme of investment in the Leisure Hive?'
suggested Morix.

Brock shook his head. 'Where would you get the money?' he demanded.
'There are bankers on Ygros-lO,' said Morix with obvious distaste. The

aristocratic Argolin had always despised those who dealt in mere money. 'You
yourself represent various investment groups.'

Brock sighed. 'Tell me,' he asked, 'how can I possibly recommend to any
banker or any of my clients that they should invest in a decaying enterprise which
is on its last legs?'

But Pangol had heard enough. The Terran upstart had dared to cast
aspersions on the glory of Argolis. Angrily he crossed the room and turned off the
hologram. Suddenly in mid sentence the figure of the Terran accountant faded
from view.

The other Argolin smiled approvingly at each other. There was a time, not
too long ago, when at the slightest sign of contempt on the part of any foreigner,
Terran or whoever, they could have spitted the offending churl on the end-of
their electronic lances. But these days were gone, more's the pity.

Morix shook his head. 'That was discourteous, Pangol,' he protested. There
must be no more aggression on Argolis.'

He glanced uneasily up at an ancient helmet that hung on the wall... an
ancient Argolin tournament helmet and a lasting symbol of the ferocious Argolin
past. It was the Helmet of Theron, the helmet which the captain of the first great
Argolin expedition to the stars had worn in some of his most famous battles.
Morix feared the Argolin past. It had brought his people to the very edge of
destruction. It might destroy them yet.

He looked sadly at Pangol. There the old Argolin spirit still burned fiercely.
There was nothing more boring, thought the young visi-journalist, than

waiting in Old Delphi galacto-port for something to happen. Some story to break.
Anything. It didn't matter what. Just so long as it was newsworthy. All it needed



was some celebrity to breeze through on his, her or its way to - where? That was
the trouble. No celebrity ever visited Terra any more.

'That's the problem with Earth these days,' his companion, the oldest visi-
journalist on Terran duty, observed with a yawn. 'Nothing ever happens here.
Earth's become the Switzerland of the galaxy. A journalistic dead end. The
elephants' graveyard. The place where they send old visi-journalists to die.'

The younger man yawned too. He had heard it all before: yesterday to be
precise and no doubt he would hear it again tomorrow. The old visi-journalist
was nothing if not predictable. Hence no doubt his appointment to Terra, after a
lifetime spent covering non-stories in every crummy planet in the galaxy.

'Has it ever occurred to you,' asked the young journalist, 'that we may
actually be seeing news stories all around us? Here and now. And we can't
recognize them because we've lost the talent to see news when it happens.

'Take her,' he went on, pointing to one of the passengers who had just
entered the departure lounge.

The passenger in question was a woman, beautiful, elegant, wearing
flowing orange robes and an extraordinary coiffeur. Her hair was piled up on her
head in a smooth cone and glittered with jewels. She carried a small black globe
which was attached to her wrist by a silver chain.

'You don't see manyArgolin here, do you? Not surprising really. There can't
be that many of them left.'

The older journalist didn't answer. His almost atrophied news sense was
beginning to twitch like a sleeping spaniel.

'I wonder who she is.'
'Mena. The Consort of the Heresiarch of Argolis.'
'I went to Argolis once when I was a kid. First of the Leisure Planets. Very

colourful as I recall—'
But the old journalist was no longer listening. He had gone over to speak

to his friend who was a booking clerk. The young journalist joined him.
'She arrived here about three weeks ago,' the booking clerk was saying.
'One of your regulars?'
'Never seen her before,' replied the clerk.
'Who's the fellow with her?' asked the young journalist. They turned and

looked at the Terran who was seeing her off.
'Name of Hardin,' said the clerk, checking his booking list. 'He's booked on

the next flight.'
'To Argolis?'
The clerk nodded.
'Wonder why he's not travelling with her,' remarked the young journalist.
His colleague was trying to place the Terran. He had seen him somewhere

before. Then it came to him: 'Particle engineer. Spoke at a scientific congress
I covered about two years ago. Gave a paper on - what the devil was it now? -
"Environmental Instability: the Problems of Tachyon Technology".

'The things you remember,' said the young journalist with a laugh. I've never
met anyone with a brain packed with so much useless information. Tachyon
technology, indeed: that's hardly galaxy-shattering news. Nowonder the network
posted you to Terra if that was your idea of a scoop.'

But the spaniel refused to lie down.



'Why aren't they travelling together?' demanded the old journalist.
'Something odd there.'

'Maybe she doesn't want to listen to any more boring old lectures on
Environmental Instability or whatever it was during her trip home.'

The old journalist acknowledged the justice of the remark. It hadn't been
exactly a scintillating conference, he recalled. Even amidst a desert of technical
gobbledegook the lecture in question had seemed particularly opaque. He
remembered that the network had not used one of the stories he had filed from
the conference. When had they last used one of his stories?

'What do you think?' he asked the booking clerk.
'The chap's probably just off to Argolis to fix their tachyon generator,'

replied the latter. 'You know what the Argolin are like. Proud as princes. They
wouldn't want to travel with the hired help.'

The spaniel gave a last twitch and went back to sleep: the old journalist
shrugged. Oh, well, he thought, it was probably nothing.

Just then a silver box the size of a packing case complete with an array
of sensors entered the departure lounge. It hovered an inch or two off the floor
and moved purposefully in the direction of the Extra-Terrestrial Travellers' Bar.
The case was a mobile environment, provided by the hyperspace lines for use
by creatures for whom Terra's atmosphere was poisonous. The box could be
steered by its occupant and a variety of translating devices enabled the traveller
to communicate his, her or its wishes in any hyperspace port of the galaxy.

'Knowwho that is?' demanded the young journalist, gathering his mini-cam
and recording and translating gear.

The old journalist shook his head-He found it increasingly difficult to keep
track of Off-World celebrities.

'One of the mud dancers from Hesperus-2. They came sixth in the last
intergalactic final. Come on,' he said. 'Ought to be a story there/

But there wasn't. At least the network didn't think so.
Later, over a glass of synthetic Scotch, the older journalist remembered why

he had been curious about the particle engineer and the Argolin woman. After
all, why should the Argolin need an expert on environmental instability when,
as everyone knew, they had a perfectly good tachyon generator?



4. The Generator

That morning in his bare, cell-like room Morix, Heresiarch of Argolis, had
had his first seizure. A fit of coughing that left him grey and gasping for breath.
He realized the significance of the attack. He had even been half expecting it.
Now it had come hewould face death quietly andwith dignity, like a true Argolin
knight. But first there were duties still to perform.

Too weak to stand, he summoned the medical guides to bring a hover litter.
The two orderlies laid him on the litter and bore him to the boardroom where
they sat him in his chair.

At his command they pressed a button on the desk console. A blank area of
the boardroom wall slid back to reveal a view of the Argolin landscape. Not the
landscape as it was today-cold, jewelled, glittering, lit by the refracted colours
of a million rainbows. But the landscape of Argolis as it had been before the
Foamasi War. The land was green and lush, with rolling hills and dense woods
where once Argolin knights had hunted. Flowers grew in profusion. There was
an abundance of fruit. The air was perfumed and sweet.

Pangol entered the room, but Morix did not hear him. He was lost in
contemplation of the past beauty of the planet.

Morix's breath rattled in his throat. 'There must gave been a great madness
in our race,' he whispered, 'to have allowed all this to be destroyed/

Pangol was not impressed. 'The Foamasi struck when we were not
prepared,' he said.

'We both struck together,' declared Morix. 'I should know, I commanded
one of the great hyperspace war galleys. I remember I was astonished to discover
a race that reacted in battle as swiftly as the Argolin. I had barely ordered the
crew of my war galley to fire the missiles, when I heard, over the hyperspace
link-up, a Foamasi captain give the identical command,'

Morix shook his head. 'No,' he said. 'We were both equally guilty.'
Another fit of coughing overtook him. He lay helpless in his chair, unable to

move. One of the orderlies wiped his brow.Morix nodded his thanks. He seemed
to be ageing before their eyes.

The screen on the desk console flickered into life, revealing the face of the
guide who was in charge of welcoming the shuttle arrivals.

'Heresiarch, a Terran has just arrived off the shuttle and begs audience—'
'I don't beg a damn thing!' snapped a familiar Terran voice. 'I just want to

see Morix. Tell the Chairman of this Leisure Planet that it's urgent. I've no time
to waste on Argolin ceremony.'

'His name is Brock,' explained the guide.
Pangol reacted angrily to the name. 'Come to sneer at us no doubt,' he said.

'There was a time when a mere Terran would have been flogged for such
temerity.'

Morix silenced the younger man with a feeble motion of his hand. 'Send
him to me,' he whispered.

Pangol gazed fondly at the ancient duelling helmet that hung on the wall.
The Helmet of Theron the Great. If Theron had only discovered Terra on his first



space voyage, he thought, he would have left that miserable planet and everyone
on it barbecued to a crisp. Then there would have been no Brock to insult the
Argolin now.

Morix motioned to the orderlies to press the button that controlled the wall
panel. He watched the ancient landscape of Argolis vanish behind the white
section of wall.

Brock threw open the door and burst into the room. Hewas a thick-set, dark-
haired man who burned with a restless energy the others could feel. It was: like
standing close to a noisy engine: you felt the valve settings needed adjustment.
He was accompanied by a gaunt Terran who carried a briefcase and offered
nothing by way of greeting.

'Mr Chairman,' said Brock genially, 'and my dear Pangol, after ail these
years of dealing with you via the telecommunicator, here I am at last in the all-
too-solid flesh,' He patted his slight paunch and laughed. He slapped Pangol on
the shoulder and then lumbered over to shake Morix by the hand. He stopped in
his tracks, aghast at the sight of the figure in the chair. Could this grey, waxen,
shrunken creature be Morix, last of the Heresiarchs, Chairman of the Leisure
Planet Argolis Inc.? It 'Morix?' he asked questioningly.

With, agonizing slowness the figure inclined his head.
Brock turned to Pangol for explanation. The latter replied bitterly: 'Hard to

recognize, isn't he?'
'Well, I—' The Terran spread his hands, lost for amoment for words. 'What's

the matter with him? Is he ill? Is there anything I can do?'
'He's dying,' said Pangol brutally. 'Take a good: look. Outsiders never get

the chance to see it. It's our secret The way the Argolin die. The way we all die
on this planet.'

'I don't understand.'
'It's because of the Foamasi,' explained Pangol. 'The radiation from their

missiles affected our metabolic rate, slowing it for long periods of time. For years
we don't appear to age at all. It's as if we were kept under glass. The radiation
actually preserves our bodies - until what we call the Twilight Time.' Pangol
grinned wolfishly. Then suddenly some metabolic key is tripped -and the whole
ageing process begins. It speeds up. In a few hours, a few days at most, our bodies
age fifty or sixty years. An Argolin can be fit and well one minute, and the next
he has become a shell, a skeleton ravaged by the years.'

With a great effort Morix spoke: 'Forgive Pangol, my dear Brock. He knows
I have only a little time to live. He is angry. But there is no reason to be. Death,
when it comes to the Argolin, strikes swiftly.'

Brock shook his head. 'I didn't know,' he said.
'No one knows,' snapped Pangol. 'We don't broadcast the fact. Long ago the

Argolin Council decided to keep it a secret. They decided it might be bad for the
Leisure Planet business. Might put the holiday makers off if they knew that their
charming guides carried a biological time bomb around inside them.'

'If I had known, I would never have come—' Brock glanced uneasily at
Klout, his lawyer.

'Why did you come here?' askedMorix. 'In the past we've always conducted
our business by telecommunicator. And why bring a lawyer with you?'



He glanced suspiciously, at the gaunt silent figure who stood beside the
accountant.

'Because I thought we might need one.'
'Why?'
Brock sighed. It was going to be hard; harder than he had thought. 'Since I

spoke to you, there has been an offer,' he said.
An offer? From whom?'
'From a group with 30 trillion galactic credits to invest.'
A rare smile lit up Morix's drawn features. 'They want to invest in the

Leisure Hive?' he asked.
Brock shook his head. 'Not exactly, Mr Chairman,' he said. 'They want to

buy Argolis. The whole planet. Lock, stock and radioactive barrel.'
The silence which greeted his words seemed to Brock to hang in the air

of the boardroom, like some bird of ill omen. He coughed. 'I think it's a very
generous offer,' he said at last.

No one replied.
He said: 'I don't think we're likely to get a better one.'
'Buy Argolis?' Morix repeated blankly.
Brock hastened on. 'That's why I thought I ought to come and see you in

person,' he explained. 'In view of the financial state of Argolis Leisure Planet
Inc., believe me it's an offer you cannot afford to refuse.

'Just think of it,' he continued, emboldened. 'You can unload this white
elephant of a place and buy yourselves another planet. There are plenty for sale
in this quadrant of the galaxy. You can have a choice of atmospheres. Oxygen.
Nitrogen. Methane. Argon. Whatever suits you: just take your pick.'

Still no one replied.
'Don't think of it as losing your home,' he advised., 'Remember you'll be

able to take your people from this dead, poisoned world to a new planet where
you can actually walk around on the surface and breathe the air. Or methane. Or
argon. Whichever takes your fancy... '

'His voice died away.
Brock swallowed.
Pangol could contain himself no longer. 'We will not sell our birthright!' he

cried. 'Argolis is not for sale!
After a glance at Morix, who seemed to have fallen into a coma, Brock

turned on Pangol. He had taken quite enough from this young Argolin. It was
time to acquaint him with the brutal facts of commercial life. 'That, my dear
Pangol, is not for you to decide. Nor for Morix, come to that. It is a board
decision. The board of Argolis Leisure Planet inc. will be the final arbiter.'

'I wouldn't bank on that,' replied Pangol. 'The Argolin always obey their
leader.'

Silent, immobile, K9 stood forlornly on a table while the Doctor unscrewed
his side panel. As soon as he began to ease the panel off, about half a gallon of
cold seawater gushed out all over his feet.

'Urgh!' cried the Doctor, hopping up and down.
Romana, who was adjusting the controls on the console in preparation for

landing, ignored him.



Grumbling to himself, the Doctor stood on one leg and removed a shoe,
which he then emptied of water.

'I'll squelch for the rest of the day,' he complained. 'Probably go down with
flu or pneumonia.'

There was a faint jarring as the TARDIS alighted.
'We've arrived,' announced Romana.
'Oh,' said the Doctor, studying the jumble of wet and tangled relays and

micro circuits which filled most of K9's interior. 'It'll take ages to get him
operational again.'

Romana prepared to leave the TARDIS. 'Well, I'm startingmy holiday now,'
she said, pressing the lever on the console which activated the doors. She stepped
out into the Great Leisure Hall of Argolis.

Unhappily the Doctor picked a piece of seaweed off K9s motor circuits.
Then a thought occurred to him. 'We're hardly likely to need K9 here, are we?'
he said.

He was never more wrong.
Romana was standing in the middle of the Great Hall. She was staring

upwards, lost in wonder as the myriad colours of Argolis chased each other in,
countless different shades and patterns across the sky.

No one had noticed the arrival of the TARDIS, largely because everyone
else, like Romana, was goggle-eyed at the view. As for the police box itself, it
fitted in amongst the many kiosks and cabins in the Great Hall. In any case those
visitors who were not busy gawping at the Argolin rainbows were watching the
big bubble screen set above a kind of booth.

The Doctor locked the TARDIS behind him and moved over to the screen.
On it, in 3-D, he saw that a game of squash was in progress. The two players, both
humanoid, were very expert. The ball flashed back and forth with monotonous
regularity. Then something strange happened to the game. The ball assumed a
life of its own. The laws of gravity ceased to apply. The players were now seen to
be in a state of free fall, yet they still continued to stroke the ball back and forth.

'Clever,' observed Romana, who had come up to stand beside the Doctor.
'Wonder how they do it?'

'Unreal transfer,' replied the Doctor. 'Has to be.'
'One problem.'
'What?'
'This part of the galaxy doesn't discover the principles of unreal transfer for

another century and a half. I looked it up: it's a matter of historic record.
Then the history books have got it wrong,' said the Doctor. 'Not for the first

time,' he added.
The game of squash was replaced in the bufebl other scenes, which were

all fantastically manipulated in their turn. Then Pangol appeared, floating inside
the bubble. Or so it seemed. He smiled and waved at his audience.

'Sorry, ladies and gentlemen,' he said genially, 'but that completes the
demonstration for the moment. See you soon.'

An expression of alarm crossed his face.
'I hope,' he added - as one of his arms detached itself from his body and

flew off into space.



The audience reacted in shocked horror, which rapidly degenerated into
laughter when Pangol, apparently undisturbed by the loss of a limb, tried to grab
it as it floated past him. The laughter continued when one of his legs fell off and
started to do a dance on its own. Eventually all that was left of Pangol was his
head, which began to grow larger and larger until it filled the whole bubble. At
the end there was just his eye. The bubble had become one enormous staring
eyeball.

'See you soon,' said Pangol-and winked.
The audience applauded enthusiastically.
You still say it's unreal transfer?' queried Romana.
The Doctor shook his head. 'I don't know,' he admitted. 'But if it isn't, then

someone's found out how to do some very strange things with a tachyon
generator.'

'He's got a lot of talent, that boy of yours,' remarked Brock.
He and Morix were still sitting in the boardroom.
They had been watching Pangol's display of tachyonics on one of the video

screens. Morix, who seemed to have recovered slightly, indicated that Brock
should turn off the monitor.

'Take my advice, old friend,' said the Terran, leaning across to depress the
button on the desk console. 'Sell this place. Get rid of it. Buy a new future for
your race.'

'It's very tempting,' agreed Morix.
'It's the sensible thing to do.'
'From where does this offer originate?'
Brock shrugged. 'It's not important who wants to buy the planet,' he

observed. 'Just be grateful that somebody does.'
'Who are they?'
'A group,' he said. 'A syndicate.'
'Which group? What syndicate?'
'Does it matter?'
Obviously it did.
Brock sighed; he could see trouble looming ahead. 'Very well,' he replied

at last. 'If you must know, it's a Foamasi syndicate which has made the offer.'
Morix stared at him in amazement. 'Foamasi?' he cried, seemingly

rejuvenated by the sudden access of adrenalin in his veins.
'Their galactic credits are as good as anyone else's,' pointed out Brock.

'Better, in fact. Since no one else can breathe your atmosphere— only a reptilian
species whose genes were randomly modified by the effect of radioactivity
caused by Argolin missiles.'

Morix did not reply for a moment. He was trying to take in the news. 'You
mean,' he said at last, 'that it is because of our missiles that-the Foamasi can
breathe our polluted air?'

'It's about the only air they can breathe.' Brock laughed without humour.
'Ironic, isn't it, when you come to think about it? But that's the way it is. As a
result of the war you waged, you made your own planet uninhabitable for your
own race. Yet at the same time you transformed your enemies into the only
biological heirs to your own world. At least the Foamasi could live out there on



the surface of your planet. They won't need all that protective shielding you can't
afford to maintain.'

Morix closed his eyes. Oh, my poor Argolis, he thought, is it we who are
guilty of destroying you?

'What do they want with this planet?' he asked.
'Who knows?' replied Brock. 'And who cares what a bunch of asthmatic

green snakes with legs want with a place like this? I say they're welcome to it.'
'My people will care. Pangol will care. It's hard for an Argolin to live with

defeat. And to be forced to sell our world to our enemies-isn't that the ultimate
dishonour?'

'Then you will sell?' demanded Brock.
Morix did not reply.
'Look, I'm just an accountant,' continued the other. 'Not a warrior. I don't

understand grand emotions. For me a defeat is when the books don't balance.
Dishonour is when you lose to the galactic tax collectors.'

Suddenly tired, Morix leaned his head on his hands. A crystal, one of the
jewels with which all the Argolin dressed their hair, fell on to the table. Brock
forbore to pick it up.

The Doctor and Romana joined the crowd of excited holidaymakers who
surrounded Pangol when he emerged from the tachyon generator.

'It is a well known fact that the tachyon was first discovered on Earth,'
insisted an intense lady. She was dressed in a seamless, fluorescent suit that fitted
her like a second skin and she wore a hat that looked as if it were made out of
living moss (which it was). She glared accusingly at Pangol.

'Agreed,' said Pangol. 'The tachyon particle was first hypothesised on Terra.
But that's as far as they got. They never developed it. They never did anything
about it.'

'What I'm saying,' insisted the lady in the moss hat, 'is that it is quite wrong
of you to claim tachyonics as an Argolin science. We on Earth could have done
all this—' she waved a set of jewelled nails at the generator '—if we had wanted.'

Pangol once again blandly agreed with the woman. But Romana, who was
watching him, could see the rage boiling inside the young Argolin. It was like a
forest fire: one day it would get out of control. How you hate all these visitors to
your planet, she thought! 'Excuse me,' said the Doctor. 'May I ask a question?'

The lady in the fluorescent suit attempted to wither the tall, oddly dressed
figure with a glance. In the course of her seven marriages it was a technique she
had employed successfully to reduce her husbands to nerveless wrecks. But the
Doctor, unwithered, unwrecked, smiled aimiably.

'Argolin science! It doesn't exist,' she declared. And she turned on her heel
and left.

Pangol fought to regain his self control. He shrugged. 'Must be one of those
Terran nationalists,' he said at last.

But the Doctor wasn't interested in politics. 'As I understand it,' he observed,
'a tachyon travels faster than the speed of light.'

'Correct.'
'So it follows that a tachyon field can be made to arrive at Point B before

it has left Point A. Am I right?'



'Quite right,' agreed Pangol. Or put it another way,' went on the Doctor. 'A
tachyon field can move backwards or forwards in Time without relation to the
space it occupies.'

'Indeed.'
'Which is all very interesting,' said the Doctor. 'That is, if you're interested

in hypothetical particles. But it doesn't explain what went on when the generator
projected your image-or was it really you?-into that thing up there.' He pointed
to the bubble screen.

Pangol's eyes were wary. 'What did you say your name was?' he asked.
'I didn't,' said the Doctor. 'Anyway we were talking about your generator.'
'If you like I could show you the wave equations that define the creation of

three-dimensional tachyonic images—' began Pangol.
'I like,' replied the Doctor. He took a stub of a pencil and a crumpled piece

of paper from his pocket. 'Here. Use this.'



5. Intruders

A bitter wind blew, colder than charity. Even if you were protected by a
heated space suit, it still seemed to chill you to the bone. Or perhaps that was
just the effect of the dead landscape-an immense plain broken here and there by
short, jagged outcrops of rock: mostly quartz and granite. Everything else had
been worn away.

The surface of Argolis was gritty underfoot and (covered with a kind of
coarse dust, a couple of centimetres thick. It was like walking on ash, which is
precisely what the surface layer was composed, of - ash and cold cinders.

The colours which blazed in the sky overhead somehow made the scene
look even more desolate. Once outside the Leisure Hive you realized that the
air-or at least the gales that roared across the planet-were full of tiny fragments
of glittering dust which reflected and refracted light from Argolis suns.'

Somewhere in this brilliant world of colour ash stirred and rose and was
snatched away in the wind. Webbed feet left tracks which were instantly erased.
Something Was moving cautiously across the barren plain in the direction of
the Hive. They-for by now it was clear there were at least two of them - had
planned their advance with care. Out of sight of the great observation domes,
which errupted from the building like enormous transparent blisters and were
crowded with holidaymakers, they approached the rear of the Hive. They
followed the wall round to where the storerooms, offices, laboratories and other
service areas were located. There they attached a sensor to the exterior wall, and
listened.

There was the sound of movement within; some Argolin was checking
equipment in a storeroom. They waited patiently under the lee of the wall, their
breathing harsh and laboured in the poisonous air of Argolis. At last, when their
detector confirmed that the Argolin had gone and the storeroom beyond was
empty, they began work.

Getting into the Hive took a matter of minutes. They attached a small box
to the wall, then drew it slowly down the side of the Hive, so that it traced out
a circle-a circle large enough to permit their access. Inside, in the darkness of
the storeroom, the circular lines glowed and the wall itself bubbled as if attacked
by acid. When the circle was complete, a slight pressure from a clawed hand
was enough to push the segment of wall inwards. The figures entered the Hive.
They replaced the cut fragment of wall and, using the same device, reversed the
cutting process. The opening was sealed shut, and to the casual observer there
was no sign it had ever existed.

It was the duty of the maintenance guides to monitor all functions of the
Leisure Hive 20.5 hours a day. (Incidentally 20.5 hours was the length of an
Argolin day.) Any change in atmospheric pressures or increase in radiation
levels-in fact any variation in the physical status of the Hive-and lights would
begin to flash in the maintenance control room. Alarms sounded. Emergency
routines went into immediate operation. The extent of the damage (if any) was
assessed, and repairs put in hand.



A maintenance guide reported to his superior: 'There appears to be a small
break in the fabric of the exterior wall.'

'Whereabouts?'
'Storeroom area.'
The senior maintenance guide checked all his instruments. They confirmed

his assistant's report. He was just about to seal off that section of the Hive and
order in a maintenance crew, when the alarm stopped. The guide rechecked his
instruments. They now registered no activity above acceptable safety
parameters. Apparently the Hive was operating normally again.

'Must be a temporary equipment failure,' he concluded. 'Order everyone to
stand down.'

Such failures were becoming routine now that Argolis Leisure Planet Inc.
was being forced to economize on regular maintenance work.

In the boardroom Morix lay in his chair, gasping for breath. His face was
ashen, his eyes closed, his breathing stertorous.

Brock was alarmed. 'We can't just stand here and let him die,' he told Klout.
'We have to do something.' Klout indicated the desk console. Brock played a
tattoo on a button on the console. According to the Argolin script, it should have
instantly summoned Medical Services. Apparently it didn't. Nothing happened.

'Where is everyone?' complained Brock. 'Their Chairman, their Heresiarch,
is dying. You'd think someone would care. But no one seems to give a damn,
except us.'

He lifted Morix's limp hand and let it flop back on the arm of his chair like
a dead fish.

'Go and see if you can find anybody,' he told Klout.
Klout didn't move.
Brock smiled.' Silly of me. I forgot,' he said. 'I'll go.
But before he could get to the door it slid open and Vargos and Dorant, two

of the Argolin, entered.
'About time,' snapped Brock. 'Morix is much worse.'
Vargos and Dorant ignored the Terran. They crossed to the Heresiarch, and

while one took his pulse, the other lifted his eyelids.
'How long has he been like this?' demanded Vargos,
'It all happened a moment ago,' replied Brock. 'He suddenly... collapsed.'
Dorant felt for the vein on Morix's neck. 'It's nearly time,' he told Vargos.
'Is there anything we can do?' asked Brock.
'Nothing.'
Vargos went to a wall cupboard and took out a package, which turned out

to contain something that resembled a silver plastic sleeping bag.
'Aren't you going to do anything for him,' demanded the Terran. 'The man's

obviously very sick.'
The two Argolin ignored the Terrans. They took their places one on either

side of the Argolin leader. Together they levered him into a sitting position. For
a moment Morix sat bolt upright, his eyes closed, his breathing sounding as if
his lungs were a pair of punctured bellows. Then suddenly the bellows stopped.
The Heresiarch of Argolis ceased breathing. His head fell forward onto the table
and the last remaining crystals which glittered in his hair fell out. His hair turned
in a second from gold to white. Morix was dead.



'Good grief,' said Brock, 'is that how all you Argolin die?'
Swiftly the two Argolin slid the corpse into the silver bag and zipped it up.

While they were thus occupied, Brock looked at Klout and motioned for him to
go. Klout slipped out of the boardroom.

In the Great Hall the Doctor and Romana listened intently to Pangol's
explanation of the working of his tachyon generator. The Doctor was puzzled. It
seemed to him there was a devil of a lot the fellow wasn't explaining.

'I'm not surprised,' said Romana. 'Look at his audience. Do they look as if
they'd understand Cerenkov radiation wave equations?'

'All the same,' insisted the Doctor, 'he's obviously made some kind of
breakthrough in tachyonics. So why not tell us about it? Why not flaunt it?'

'Modesty,' suggested Romana.
'Rubbish,' declared the Doctor. 'Commercial reason?'
'Possibly.' The Doctor gazed thoughtfully at the generator. 'You know I

wish I could get inside there and take a look at the negative-image chamber.'
Unknown to the Doctor and Romana that was precisely what someone was

doing.
The shuttle from the hyperspace liner fromTerra descended onto the surface

of Argolis. The first person to leave the craft, once the door was open, wasMena.
She was still clutching the black globe which was chained to her wrist.

Mena had been informed of Morix's death during the hyperspace trip, and
in true Argolin fashion had taken the news without a flicker of emotion. She
had bowed her head in silence for a moment, for she had respected her consort.
Then with quiet courtesy she had thanked the Captain of the hyperspace liner
who had left his bridge to break the news to her. He had attempted to express his
sympathy, but the words had died on his lips under the gaze of those impassive
Argolin eyes.

'I'll never understand the Argolin,' he complained to his second officer when
he returned to the bridge. They're cold.'

'It's all because of their warrior ethic,' explained the second officer, who
would often while away the long watches by reading galactic history land
anthropology. ' "Sorrow, pain and fear are "weaknesses in a warrior",' he quoted.
' "Eliminate them." That's the First Precept of Theron the Terrible.'

'Good thing there aren't many Argolin left, if you ask me,' he went on.
'Otherwise they might feel inclined to put into practice Theron's Second Precept.'

'What's that?' ' "War is the right and duty of every Argolin",' Quoted the
second officer.

Mena hastened up the hover pavement to the First Observation Hall.
Ignoring, as all the Argolin did, the fever-shifting parade of colours above her
head, she made her way to the boardroom of the Leisure Hive. There she was
met by Brock, full of sympathy and ready to proffer a shoulder to weep on. But
as he soon discovered, the Argolin do not weep.

'Morix did his duty as an Argolin should,' she declared, cutting short his
condolences.

'The Heresiarch died well,' said Vargos, intoning Ihe ritual phrases for the
death of a leader of the mrgolin. 'And may the next Heresiarch die as gravely.'

'Praise be to Theron, murmured Dorant. Mena bowed her head.



Themoment of sentiment over, she took her seat in the chair in whichMorix
had died. 'In view of the death of my consort,' she said, 'and in accordance with
the laws of my people, I automatically become Chairwoman of the Leisure Hive
and Heresiarch of Argolis. Agreed?

'Agreed,' said Vargos and Dorant. 'Wait a minute,' objected Brock. 'Surely
we ought; to discuss this—'

'There is nothing to discuss,' observed the new Chairwoman: 'The
succession is decided. And now to business... '

To Brock's amazement they then discussed the day-to-day routine of the
running of the Leisure Hive during her absence on Terra, as if nothing had
happened.

At last Vargos asked: 'Where is the Earth scientist? I thought you were
bringing him with you?'

Mena explained that Hardin and his assistant were arriving by the next
shuttle. She unlocked the chain from her wrist and slid the black globe on the
table.

'Here it is,' she said. 'I thought I ought to bring it with me. A holocrystal
of the first trials.

'What trials?' asked Brock. 'What's been going on behind your accountant's
back?'

'Hardin has found a better use for Argolin tachyonics than those games with
which Pangol amuses the holidaymakers,' announced Mena.

'What better use? What's this Hardin fellow discovered?' demanded the
accountant. 'He has shown us how to manipulate Time.'

Using the stub of a pencil, the Doctor was trying to work out the various
mathematical equations which Pangol punched out on the console of the
generator. The equations appeared on the bubble screen.

'Satisfied?' asked Pangol who was growing weary of the Doctor's persistent
questions.

'Frankly,' replied the Doctor, 'no.'
'What's wrong? Can't you do the sums?'
Pangol winked at the crowd of holidaymakers, who roared with laughter.

Here was an unexpected bonus to their day-the discomfiture of a would-be
expert.

'All you're giving me,' said the Doctor patiently, 'is the building blocks of
tachyonics. General theory's all very well, but let's have a few specifics.'

'Like what?'
'Temporal ratios. Duration constants. Reduplication fields.'
Pangol's eyes narrowed. This strange-looking visitor was beginning to ask

some awkward questions. He seemed to know altogether too much about
tachyoaics for his own good. Somehow he had to be headed off.

'One of these days, when we've got more time,' lied Pangol, 'I'll be happy
to show you around the machine.'

'Any time you like,' agreed the Doctor. 'The sooner the better.'
But a balding Terran clad in a glimmering smock had other ideas. It had

been his wife's idea to come to Argolis. The place was all very colourful no
doubt, but personally he was bored stiff. The generator was the first thing he had
seen which promised to provide a good laugh.



'Forget theories,' said the Terran. 'What I want to know is-does that thing
really work, or is it all a fake?'

Gratefully Pangol turned his attention to the new questioner. 'Visitor
Loman,' he said, reading the name badge attached to the man's smock, 'you think
we might have been using edited recordings in our demonstration, do you?'

'You're dead right!'
'Rubbish,' snapped the Doctor. 'The whole thing's real—that's what worries

me.'
Pangol ignored his intervention. 'Perhaps you'd care to try the machine for

yourself, Mr Loman,' hi suggested. 'Take my place inside.'
Mr Loman stared at the generator, his enthusiasm for the prospect waning

fast.
'Having second thoughts?' queried Pango maliciously.
'No, of course not,' replied the man witb noticeable lack of conviction.
The watching holidaymakers roared with laughter.
Pangol slid open the doors to the central chambel of the generator and

invited Loman to enter. 'There' nothing to it,' he told the Terran. 'The machine
does it all. Just stand in the image chamber and try to relax.'

Loman smiled weakly, but he managed a cheery wave to the crowd outside
before Pangol closed the doors.

Pangol busied himself at the control console 'First,' he told his audience,
'the projection.'

Suddenly a startled Loman could be sfcen floating upside down in the
bubble screen.

The crowd applauded.
'Two temporally coincident Mr Lomans are now in existence,' explained

Pangol; 'one inside the imag chamber, the other as you can see-within th bubble.
'Now, he went on, 'we can manipulate the one without injuring the other.'
He began to punch in instructions to sjthe computer. The audience stared at

the image of Loman, now right side up, floating in the bubble. Apparently full
of confidence, the Terran began to wave at his fellow holidaymakers. He pulled
faces and clowned around to the amusement of the audience.

Suddenly a look of agony crossed his face.
His left arm detached itself from his shoulder and floated off into space. But

unlike Pangol's earlier demonstration, the amputation was followed by a great
fountain of blood from his shoulder. The right leg detached itself from Loman's
body. Again it was accompanied by a cataract of blood. The bubble screen was
by now spattered with scarlet.

The crowd screamed.
Detecting the change of tone, Pangol glanced up from the computer console

and stared in horror at the one-armed, one-legged, lifeless figure of Loman
floating above the generator.

'Get him out of there!' shouted the Doctor. 'Hurry, for Heaven's sake! Open
up this thing!'

Pangol fumbled with the catch, then slid aside the doors of the generator.
The Doctor entered.

'Who is that man?' Pangol asked Romana.
'The Doctor.'



'Is he a scientist?'
Romana nodded. Experience had taught her to keep explanation down to a

minimum. In any case, how did you explain the Doctor? Even his fellow Time
Lords preferred to keep him at arm's length.

He must be the scientist Mena decided to import from Terra,' said Pangol.
'That would by why he was asking all those questions about tachyonics.'

Fortunately Romana was required neither to confirm nor deny the charge,
for just then the Doctor emerged from the generator. He was looking rather
shaken.

'How is he?' demanded Pangol.
'Dead.'
'Dead? But that's impossible.'
'Not if you've just had an arm and a leg torn off,' snapped the Doctor, who

was in no mood to suffer fools gladly.
Pangol stared at him aghast. 'You mean, what we saw on the bubble screen

really happened? It's impossible.'
'That's the second time you've said it,' observed the Doctor. 'Go and see for

yourself.'
'But you don't understand, the only way it could happen would be if the

generator had been repolarized. And that would mean the reversal of the whole
image function.'

'Tell that to the poor devil in there,' said the Doctor tartly. 'I'm sure he'll
be impressed.'

With Romana at his heels the Doctor began to elbow his way through the
excited mob. Meanwhile, using his communicator, Pangol ordered immediate
medical facilities, then he spoke to Security at some length.

The Doctor and Romana had found a quiet corner. They were hidden from
the mob's view by one of the crystal statues of Argolin heroes which dotted the
Great Recreation Hall. They were waiting for the hubbub to die down.

'I don't know about you,' remarked the Doctor, 'but I've had enough of
Argolis. Let's try and work our way back to the TARDIS and get out of here.' He
peered through the crystal pelvis of the statue. 'I don't think anyone has noticed
us yet.'

'Wrong,' said Romana.
'Eh?'
Romana nudged him. The Doctor turned round to face three large Argolin

Security guides, who were looking down on him with a distinct lack of cheer.
'Madam Chairman,' said the smallest guide, 'wishes to see you, sir.'
'Now, sir,' said the other two.
At that moment Mena was in the boardroom showing Vargos, Dorant and

Brock a holographic recording of the experiments which Hardin had done on
Terra. They were watching Hardin and his assistant, Stimson, helping an elderly
lady into a chair in their laboratory, which was placed in the midst of a set of
tachyon projectors, all wired to small individual generators.

The phantom Hardin in the holograph turned and spoke directly to his
audience. 'In this experiment,' he explained, 'I propose to demonstrate the
temporal anomaly inherent in the tachyon.'



Brock, however, was not impressed. 'Is that what Morix sent you all the
way to Terra for?' he demanded. 'What a waste of money!

Unperturbed, the holographic Hardin continued his lecture, while his
assistant checked the apparatus: 'As you all know, the tachyon travels faster than
the speed of light, thus creating in its path, in whichever direction it may travel,
a temporal anomaly. In other words, the structure of Time itself changes as a
tachyon passes.

'The theory behind my work, therefore, is simple. By controlling the
emission and direction of tachyon particles within a confined space-for example,
within the area bounded by these tachyon projectors—' he indicated the
projectors '—we should be able to affect the flow of Time itself within that area.'

The holographic Hardin nodded to his assistant who switched on the
generators. Soon the projector tubes began to glowwith a strange flickering light.

'I can't see anything happening,' grumbled Brock, 'If you ask me, the whole
thing's a waste of time. When's it supposed to start?'

'Watch,' said Mena.
Unimpressed, Brock watched. Then suddenly he leaned forward unable to

believe his eyes.
The old lady was changing. Her face began to fill out; her white hair

gradually darkened; wrinkles vanished; the colour of youth returned to her skin.
The woman was growing younger before their eyes. In a matter of minutes she
had shed twenty years.

After a while they saw that an attractive young Terran woman now sat
where once the old lady had been. They wore the same clothes. They were
unmistakably the same person. Yet one was fifty years younger than the other.

'Rejuvenation,' said Mena. 'Complete cellular rejuvenation. That's what
Hardin has achieved. He's perfected a technique capable of reversing the flow
of Time within a relatively small space-a space large enough to encompass one
human being. The result is that person grows younger. Put it another way-Hardin
seems to have discovered the Fountain of Youth.'

'I don't believe it,' declared Brock.
'You saw.'
'I don't believe what I saw.' Brock was obviously shaken by what he had

just witnessed. 'I mean, if it's true—'
'Can you doubt it?'
—then it's incredible,' he added weakly.
Mena smiled. 'Think of it,' she said. 'It could revolutionize the future of

Argolis. Can't you see the publicity? -come toArgolis-and regain your lost youth.
Grow young again on Argolts/'

'There has to be a snag,' objected Brock.
'Why?'
'Because there always is.'
As if to make a liar out of him, the holography recording kept repeating the

two images-the old woman and the young one: before and after. Those in the
boardroom watched again and again as fifty years fell from her shoulders.

It was just at that moment that the three Argolin Security guides ushered
the Doctor and Romana into the boardroom.

'Who are they?' asked Mena. I



'The scientist Hardin and his assistant, Madam Chairman,' said the senior
guide. 'You told us to look out for them, and Pangol was sure—'

'That isn't Hardin,' cried Mena. 'That man's an impostor!'
'Not exactly,' objected the Doctor, anxious to keep the record straight. 'That

is to say, it is true that I am not this Hardin chap. Whoever he may be. On the
other hand, I never claimed to be him. Did I?'

The Argolin regarded him stonily. They did not reply.
'No,' said the Doctor. 'I didn't.'
'We can conclude therefore that a very natural mistake has been made

which,' he added genially, I am prepared to overlook.'
'He was taking notes at Pangol's lecture on the generator,' insisted the senior

Argolin Security guide. 'Everyone was sure he was Mr Hardin.'
'And now he's seen these experiments,' said Brock.
'Experiments?' queried Romana, trying to brazen it out. 'What experiments?

We haven't seen any experiments. Have we, Doctor?'
But the hologram continued to cut from the old lady to the young one, from

before to after. '
No one spoke.
One of the video screens on the wall of the boardroom flashed into life.

Pangol could be seen in the mortuary. Behind him was an Argolin pathologist
who was inspecting the mortal remains of Mr Loman.

'There's been sabotage at the generator,' announced Pangol. 'One of the
visitors has been killed. Murdered. Someone reversed the image function in the
generator.'

'That's all we need,' groaned Brock. 'A murder in the Leisure Hive. You just
wait and see the effect it has on the bookings.'

Mena took charge. She ordered Pangol to have the body prepared for
immediate repatriation toMr Loman's home planet.Which in this casewas Earth.

'And tell our mortician,' she went on, 'that I want his best cosmetic job. The
dead visitor must return looking as if he died peacefully in his sleep.'

While Mena was thus engaged, the Doctor and Romana began to edge
towards the door. By the time she was ready to continue her questioning of them,
they had slipped away. 'Go after them!' she commanded. 'I want them brought
back here.'

In the corridor the Doctor and Romana met a Security guide.
'Can I help you?' he asked.
'No, thank you,' replied the Doctor. 'We're just leaving. But you had better

be on the look-out for two unidentified aliens. Stand by for a description from
your leader.'

Like a good Argolin, the Security guide came to attention, alert for any
instructions which might come over his communicator. Right on cue Mena's
voice could be heard saying: 'Attention. Attention. Attention. All Security guides
to be on the look-out for two visitors. Description - one tall curly-haired
humanoid (male) in the company of one smaller blonde humanoid (female).'

The Doctor and Romana took to their heels before the Argolin could match
the description to them.

That experiment was faked,' gasped Romana when they paused for breath
by one of the pillars in the Great Recreation Hall.



'I know,' wheezed the Doctor, leaning against the crystal statue of Lismar
the Champion. The ancient Argolin hero had been caught by the sculptor in an
agressive pose, his sword at the ready. 'Two discontinuous holographs had been
edited together. I noticed very faint interference patterns.'

'I noticed the necklace.'
'What necklace?'
'The one she wore. Look,' explained Romana, 'both the old woman and the

young one wore the same clothes. But they forgot to match their jewellery.
Different necklaces.'

The Doctor thought about it. 'Odd when you think about it,' he said at last.
'On the one hand you have something going very wrong inside their tachyon
generator. At the same time someone on Earth has been faking experiments in
tachyonics. Are the two events connected? If so, how and why?'

Romana could see the danger signals. The Doctor was beginning to become
interested in Argolis and its problems. 'Let's get back to the TARDIS before
we land in real trouble,' she declared, painfully aware that she had said that
frequently in the past - all to no avail.

Nothing daunted, she seized the ends of the Doctor's scarf and proceeded to
drag him in the direction of the police box. Unfortunately it was not until she got
to the door of the TARDIS that she realized she was towing in her wake, not the
Doctor as she had thought, but the crystal statue of Lismar the Champion. The
Doctor's scarf was wound round the Champion's neck. Meanwhile the Doctor
himself was over the other side of the Great Recreation Hall, examining the
generator.

'Doctor!' cried Romana. 'Doctor! Come on!'
But she was too late. The Doctor was already opening the door of the

generator.
'Won't be a jiff!' he called. 'Back in a second!'
And with a cheery wave he popped inside the generator and closed the door

behind him.
Romana ran over and tried to force open the door. But it wouldn't budge; the

Doctormust have tripped the catch from the inside. Romana pounded desperately
on the door.

'Come out!' she yelled. 'Come out of there! We're in enough trouble as it is.'
But the door was soundproof.
Inside the generator the Doctor could hear nothing, except for the gentle

humming of the generator itself. The Doctor was standing inside a black
dodecahedron.

The interior of the image chamber was lit by a subdued light which seemed
to emanate from the black glass panels lining the walls. Curious, the Doctor
inspected the panels. They fitted neatly into each other, revealing no sign of join
or crack. With the aid of his sonic screwdriver, he managed to prise off one of
the panels. It came away easily once the magnetic seal had been broken. Behind
it lay no labyrinth of wires and tubes and micro-circuits. Instead there was a
kind of infinitude. An emptiness. A nothingness, cold as Space itself, in which
drifted slow wraiths of what looked like smoke which crackled periodically with
tachyon emissions.

'Fascinating,' said the Doctor.



While Romana was busy trying to force the door of the generator, the
diagnostic panel by the control console suddenly flickered into life. On it
appeared the words: SENTIENT LIFE FORM INSIDE THE GENERATOR.
FAIL SAFE MECHANISM IN OPERATION.

Finding the door immovable, Romana called to a group of passing
holidaymakers for help. They came running over at once and shoved and pushed
at her command. But even their united strength could not move the door. It was
locked fast.

Meanwhile something with green, scaly, clawlike hands took advantage of
the uproar to issue fresh instructions to the computer. The instructions, which
appeared on the diagnostic panel of the console, consisted of only five words —
but they spelt death to any occupant of the image chamber: OVER-RIDE FAIL
SAFE MECHANISM.

The faint humming of the generator changed key. A different note could
now be heard. The machine was running. Its operations were random and lethal.

Someone in the crowd screamed and pointed at the bubble screen.
Romana looked up. In the bubble she saw the Doctor, his face contorted

with agony. He was gradually being torn apart.



6. Hardin

As Pangol and Brock entered the Great Recreation Hall, the latter pointed:
'There he is!'

Pangol stared in horror at the figure of the Doctor trapped in the bubble
screen. Both arms had been torn from their sockets and a leg was floating beside
him.

'Help me get him out!' screamed Romana.
Pangol ran across to the control console and pressed the door release button,

while Brock lent his considerable weight to forcing the door. But nothing
happened. The door remained jammed.

'Switch off the power,' suggested Romana.
'I can't,' replied Pangol.
'Why not?'
'I don't know. The computer must be malfunctioning,'
But there must be something we can do.'
'You could try shorting the servo-lock mechanism,' said a familiar voice. 'I

did. It worked in my case.'
Romana and Pangol turned round to find the Doctor standing behind them.
'How did you get out?' they demanded.
But the Doctor was admiring himself in the bubble screen above the

generator. There he could be seen to be in no fewer than six separate pieces.
'Handsome chap,' he remarked smugly.

lf you're out here,' demanded Romana, 'who's that up there?'
'One of those famous tachyon images. It'll fade soon. Look.'
They saw the figure of the dismembered Doctor gradually begin to fade.
'How did you get out?' asked Pangol.
'Through a hole in the back.'
'But there isn't one.'
'There is now,' replied the Doctor.
When Hardin arrived on Argolis with his assistant, Stimson, he was

surprised to find they were not expected. Not that he had hoped to be met by a
welcoming committee, but some acknowledgement of his existence would have
done wonders for his confidence. Instead they stepped off the shuttle to find that
no one even knew their names. Obviously Mena had failed to warn any of the
staff. Why?

Hardin, who was a compulsive worrier, began to worry. He left Stimson
to enjoy the colours of Argolis in the First Observation Hall, while he made his
way to the boardroom.

There he found Mena alone, sitting in the Heresiarch's chair, and watching
the antics in progress around the tachyon generator. The bank of video screens
facing her showed the scene from several different angles.

My dear,' he said, pleased to see her again.
Mena corrected him gently. 'Madam Chairman.'
'Madam Chairman?'
'Morix, my consort, is dead. I am now the ruler of Argolis.'



Hardin nodded. He had heard the news from the telecast aboard the
hyperspace liner. 'Does it make any difference to our - relationship?' he asked.

'I am no longer a free agent,' explained Mena. 'I am now responsible for
this planet. The past is past.'

'For the time being at any rate,' she added. 'I understand,' said Hardin. 'I
shall not embarrass!, you.'

Abruptly Mena changed the subject. Anything to distance herself from
those few mad days she had spent on Terra with this man. She pointed to the
video screen, where two Security guides could be seen dragging the indignant
Doctor away from a strange blue box. 'Do you know this man?' she asked. Hardin
shook his head.

'He seems to be some kind of scientist. A Doctor no less. He claims to
know something about tachyonics.' She looked directly at Hardin. 'Hementioned
temporal instability,' she went on. 'How much does he know?'

That, thought Hardin, was precisely the question.
'Anyway it would do no harm to keep him out of circulation for a while,'

Mena said. 'At least until we're ready.'
'Ready for what?'
'For a full scale experiment.' She smiled at him. 'You told me yourself on

Terra that all the work had been done: you had solved all the problems.'
'Yes,' replied Hardin uneasily. 'Most of the problems.'
Much to his relief their , conversation was interrupted by the Security

guides, who entered with the Doctor and Romana. Brock brought up the rear.
Mena lost no time in getting down to business. 'You are the Doctor?' she
enquired. The Doctor acknowledged the fact. 'Where do you come from?'

'Gallifrey.'
'I've never heard of the place.'
'I'm not surprised,' agreed the Doctor. 'It's a small, remote planet. Why

should you have heard of it?'
'And we're overdue there,' explained Romana. 'We ought to be on our way

now, oughtn't we, Doctor?'
The Doctor took the hint. 'Yes, indeed,' he said. 'Time we were off.'
But the Security guides blocked their path.
'Goodbye,' said the Doctor hopefully.
Mena ignored their attempts to leave. 'Tell me about Gallifrey?' she asked.

'Do they experiment with Time there?'
'Time?' queried the Doctor, as if he had never heard of such a thing.
Mena did not reply.
'We,' he said, 'that is to say, certain-ah -academics on Gallifrey have been

known to engage in certain-ah-academic experiments regarding temporal
matters. Time and space. Things like that. Nothing important.'

'Just experiments,' interjected Romana. Of no interest to anybody.'
'None,' agreed the Doctor. 'Why, Gallifrey abandoned tachyonics ages ago.'
'When we developed warp matrix engineering, added Romana-and then

wished she had bitten ot her tongue. If the Argolin knew anything about temporal
mechanics, then they must realize the significance of her remark.

But fortunately Mena had other things on her mind. She turned to Hardin.
'Mr Hardin, since these two persons have come from a planet where sucn matters



are obviously not unknown,' she suggested, 'perhaps they could be of assistance
to you.

Aware that he had no alternative but to comply with her plan, Hardin
nodded. He did not, however, look happy at the prospect. Neither did the Doctor.
'It will demonstrate your good faith, Doctor, said Mena.

I wasn't aware I was required to demonstrate anything,' he replied. 'Still, if
you insist—'

'I do.'
The Doctor bowed.
'You saw the recording of Mr Hardin's time experiments?' she enquired.
'Hardly.'
'A glimpse only,' agreed Romana.
Then perhaps you ought to take another look,' proposed Mena. 'Mr Hardin

will take you to the laboratory and show you his work in detail.'
'Love to,' said the Doctor. 'Unfortunately we must be going.'
'We have a schedule to keep,' explained Romana.
'You have time,' declared Mena. 'If need be, all the time in the world.' The

threat in her voice was unmistakable.
Hardin's heart sank. The last thing he wanted was an expert-or even a

knowledgeable amateur -checking on the results of his experiments.
But the Doctor wasn't prepared to give up without a fight. 'One thing I don't

understand,' he observed, 'is why Mr Hardin's work should be so important to
the Argolin.'

'I would have thought that was obvious,' replied Mena. 'As the first Leisure
Planet to offer a course of painless physical regeneration to its customers, we'll
make a fortune. We'll be the most popular place in the Galaxy. We'll be turning
down bookings.'

'Why is it I don't believe you?' said the Doctor.
In the maze of narrow maintenance tunnels underneath the Leisure Hive

some thing moved A creature with green scales and clawed hands eased its way
along a passage until it found what it was looking for-a wall panel. The creature
swiftly unscrewed the panel. Inside was a web of wires and fibres: the fibre-optic
system. Other panels gave access to the various communication and life-support
systems of the Hive. They were the arteries of Argolis. The creature deposited a
small hexagonal box amongst the wires, and then replaced the panel.

Mena threw back her head and roared with laughter. 'You're very shrewd,
Doctor,' she said. 'And very forth-right. So be it. Perhaps you deserve to learn
our secret.'

She pressed a button on the desk console. Part of the wall slid back to reveal
the Argolin landscape as it had been before the Foamasi War. The sheer beauty
of the scene made Romana and the Doctor gasp in wonder.

'It will take three centuries before the Argolin can safely walk out onto the
surface of our planet,' she continued. 'Three centuries before we can claim our
inheritance.'

'And what are you going to do meanwhile?' demanded the Doctor. 'Stay in
the Leisure Hive for three hundred years? Bring up generations of Argolin here?
Incidentally,' he added, 'where are they? I haven't seen any children here.'



Mena smiled sadly. 'There are none,' she said. 'Every war extracts its price,
and the FoamasiWar exacted themost terrible price of all.WeArgolin are sterile.
We cannot produce children. There are no future generations. The only hope for
us is to find some way of regenerating ourselves.'

She reactivated the holographic crystal which contained the recording of
Hardin's experiment with the old woman. As they watched, the woman changed
from age to youth. Mena stared at the scene as if hypnotized by it.

'Hardin's work offers my race its only hope of survival,' she said at last.
'Perhaps in time we will be able to rebuild Argolis and fill the Hive with our
children.'

Inside a wall panel in the maze of narrow maintenance tunnels underneath
the Leisure Hive there was an explosion. One of the arteries of Argol had been
severed.

Suddenly the holographic crystal went black. The picture vanished.
Frowning, Mena ran a diagnostic check through the computer. ' Inter-fibral

malfunction,' she diagnosed at last. The line has gone down.'
'Another accident?' queried the Doctor. 'Like the one this morning that

killed that poor chap in the generator?'
Mena did not reply.
'I think someone is trying to sabotage the Hive,' said the Doctor.
A strange expression crossed Mena's face. Her eyes glazed. She staggered

and would have fallen had not Hardin caught her. She clutched the table. A
crystal dropped from her hair.

'Mena,' he cried.
The Doctor took charge. 'Sit her back in the chair,' he ordered. He took her

pulse and began to examine her, paying particular attention to the skin round her
eyes and the flesh on the backs of her hands.

'What's the matter with her?' asked Hardinj anxiously. 'She looks so ill.'
'Old,' said Brock.
'Old?'
'She's just aged about twenty years in a few seconds. Like Morix. I saw

what happened to him,'
The Doctor confirmed Brock's diagnosis; 'Most remarkable,' he agreed.

'There's been a sudden cellular degeneration.'
'I don't understand,' said Hardin.
Mena took his hand in hers and grinned crookedly at him. 'Instant old age,'

she said, 'it happens to us all. Sooner or later.' She seemed to revive a little. Her
voice grew stronger. 'Now you know why your experiments are so important.
To me, most of all. They could save my life.'

Stimson was setting up the experiment at one end of the laboratory. He kept
looking over his shoulder at Hardin explaining the intricacies of the equipment
to Brock and his silent lawyer who, after being missing for a while, had suddenly
reappeared. The presence of the two Terrans worried Stimson. He could see that
Hardin was on the verge of a breakdown.

Brock was full of enthusiasm for the project. He clapped Hardin on the
shoulder. 'Sounds absolutely fascinating,' he declared. 'A real breakthrough.
There is a great commercial future for a reliable rejuvenation technique. Even
an unreliable one, come to that. People will clutch at any straw.'



'It's too soon to know how efficient my technique is,' objected Hardin. 'My
research is only in its early stages: there's a long way to go yet.'

You don't know how far, he thought.
Brock dismissed the scientist's objections with a wave of his hand. 'Doesn't

matter,' he observed. 'No one in 'heir right mind hopes to stay young for ever. Or
even wants to. What they'd like is to be able to turn back the clock a bit when
they get to middle age. They'll pay through the nose for some machine that will
peel off a few years.'

'The Argolin need more than that.'
Brock lowered his voice. 'We all knowwhat theArgolin need,' hemurmured

in Hardin's ear. 'But it doesn't mean they'll get it. Could be their metabolism's
been speeded up so much that your technique won't work on them.'

'It's not been properly tested yet,' objected Hardin. 'Nobody knows what
will happen.'

'Exactly what I'm saying,' declared Brock. 'Isn't that right, Klout?'
Klout did not reply.
Hardin realized that he had never heard him speak.
'If your technique doesn't work on the Argolin, whichHeaven forbid,' Brock

added piously, 'then we must make sure that your great discovery isn't lost to
science for ever. That would be a tragedy.'

Brock's breath was on his cheek. It smelt sweet and faintly chemical.
'All I'm saying,' he continued, 'is that you ought to consider taking on a

business partner. Someone who would look after your interests while you
concentrated on your work. Someonewhowould see to it that all mankind reaped
the benefit of your genius. Or any kind of kind, come to that. After all there are
probably a hundred different intelligent life forms in the galaxy, many of them
with access to galactic credits on a large scale. You follow me?'

I'm way ahead of you, thought Hardin.
'Think about it,' said Brock 'that's all I ask.'
He clapped the scientist on the shoulder, then he and his ever-silent lawyer

departed.
Hardin turned to Stimson, his face a picture of despair. 'What are we going

to do?' he cried.
'Proceed as planned,' replied the other.
It had all seemed so easy when Stimson had approached him on Terra,

thought Hardin. He had spent years working on tachyonics. He had even reached
a point when he had believed he was on the verge of a great scientific
breakthrough, in the laboratory he had several times been able to arrest the flow
of time in an experimental organism. Once he had kept a Mayfly alive for three
months. Once he had even succeeded in reversing the flow of Time, so that a
chicken had been regressed into an egg. But on each and every occasion
something had gone wrong. The Mayfly when released had disintegrated into a
shower of dust; the eggwhen opened had disclosed a dead and deformed embryo.

He had been on the verge of giving up his research when Stimson had come
to see him at his laboratory. At first he, had been flattering about his work and
sympathetic that it was haunted by failure.



'All you need,' Stimson had said, 'is finance. A big grant to complete your
experiments. Look at this laboratory. Second-hand equipment. No proper
facilities. No wonder you haven't succeeded in making a breakthrough.'

The man's words had been balm to Hardin's pride. Nevertheless he had tried
to be realistic. 'These days no one will back tachyon experiments,' he had pointed
out. 'The tachyon is the Cinderella of subatomic particles. A scientific freak. You
can prove its existence, but for well over a century no one has found any use
for it.'

'Until you,' said Stimson. 'And the Argolin, of course.'
Stimson had arranged it all. He had contactedMorix, Heresiarch of Argolis,

Chairman of Argolis Leisure Planet Inc., who had shown a flattering interest in
the experiments. Hardin's confidence in his work began to blossom. Morix had
even suggested sending his consort to Terra to act as observer.

'We have to keep them interested until you can sort out the bugs in your
equipment,' Stimson had said.

'Just give them something to get their teeth into for now. Something to
believe in. A successful rejuvenator.'

'I'm not ready for that yet!' Hardin had protested.
But Stimson had been persuasive. 'By the time they get round to putting up

any money you'll have solved your technical problems.'
Perhaps it was the result of all those years of struggle and failure, but at the

time Stimson's proposition had sounded unorthodox. But not actually criminal.
In any case once Hardin had met the beautiful and elegant Mena he had been
ready to agree to anything-even Stimson's suggestion that they fake an
experiment - in order to keep her beside him for as long as possible.

And the plan had worked. Until now.
Now Mena was dying, and his work-which she still believed might save

her-was a fraud and a fake. She would die because he was unable to save her.
Stimson understood Hardin only too well. A brilliant fool, he thought,

emotionally unstable-and if he's not handled carefully, he'll destroy everything.
'Hardin,' he said, 'Mena still thinks you are the greatest scientist since Albert

Einstein. Don't disappoint her, there's a good fellow. Leave her with some hope.'
But Hardin was adamant. 'No! There have been too many lies. I must tell

Mena the truth.'
'Don't be a fool!'
'I will not be party to fraud.'
Stimson lost his temper. 'It's a bit late to think of that now!' he snapped.

'And it's no time to get an attack of the scruples. Remember where we are. On
Argolis. Their planet.What do you think the Argolin would do if they discovered
we had been leading them up the garden path? Do you really think they'd just
slap our wrists and let us go?'

'Vlena would never hurt anyone.'
'She's an Argolin, isn't she? They're all a bunch of savages at heart. Always

have been. I bet they only took up tachyonics because they thought it would
make a better weapon than a radon missile.'

But at that point their argument was interrupted by the arrival of Romana.
'How is Mena?' demanded Hardm.
'The Doctor's with her. He is doing everything he can.



'I must go to her.'
'No ' said Stimson. 'You'd only be in the way. Best thing we can do is to get

this experiment working. He turned to Romana for support. 'Right miss?
'Right. Whatever you do, get the experiment working.'
Stimson shot her a suspicious glance. He detected a satirical note in

Romana's voice. What the devil did she know? And who was this self-assured
young woman he wondered? He didn't like the professional way she was
inspecting the equipment they had assembled.

'I see you feed the tachyon drive straight into the wafer wave inducer,' she
remarked. Bit unusual, isn't it? How do you achieve inversion?

Ouch, thought Stimson, that's all we needed-an expert in tachyonics. Well,
time to bale out. Cut your losses. No one would ever accuse him of not knowmg
when to make a swift exit. He began to edge his way towards the door. 'Well?'
asked Romana.

Hardin looked blank for a moment, then with an effort of will he brought
his mind back to ner Question. He mumbled something about the divider circuit
automatically dephasing. But in the end the thought of what was happening in
the boardroom was too much for him. 'Mena's dying!' he suddenly blurted out.
'There's no way to stop cellular degeneration.' K

'First things first,' Romana replied. She was still studying the apparatus.
'Come on now. Tell me how you lock the phase.'

'I don't!' cried Hardin, 'Don't you understand, I can't! The whole contraption
doesn't work.'

'Oh, I know that,' said Romana calmly. 'But what I don't understand is why
it doesn't. You see, I think it ought to work.'

Stimson stopped an Argolin Holiday guide in the corridor to enquire about
shuttles from the planet.

'All fully booked I'm afraid,' said the Argolin, once he had consulted his
wrist computer which carried a permanent update on all shuttle flights and
bookings.

'But I must get off Argolis now,' insisted the Terran. 'I have urgent business
elsewhere. Isn't there any way—?'

The guide was sorry, but only a priority clearance from the Heresiarch
herself could wangle him as an extra passenger aboard a shuttle. 'What do I do
then?'

The guide pointed out that it was sometimes possible to take over the
booking of another off-worlder who had no use for it.

'Like who?' asked Stimson. Surely all the holidaymakers are booked on
specific flights.'

'Indeed,' agreed the guide. 'But we have other visitors, too. Experts of
different kinds. Like the Terran accountant, Mr Brock and his friend. They're
booked on the shuttle for every flight next week. They just want to make sure
they can leave the planet as soon as their work here is complete. Perhaps if you
asked him, he would let you use one of his bookings.' Stimson thanked the guide
and set about finding his fellow Earthling. He decided it was probably safest to
wait for Brock in his room.



Eventually Stimson found a cabin which bore on its door the names of
Brock and Klout. He knocked. There was no answer. He tried the handle. It was
unlocked. He entered.

The cabin was empty. It was quite palatial. But there was no sign of its
occupants. No doubt they were still in the boardroom with Mena.

Having found himself a temporary bolthole, Stimson was loath to leave. He
was safe here - for the time being, at any rate. Then an idea occurred to him.
Perhaps Brock or Klout had left behind some papers, some kind of authorization
he could use to get off this damned planet. Stimson decided to search the place.
Brock's room revealed nothing. There were no papers at all. He entered Klout's
room, which was even more spartan. Stimson threw open the wardrobe. What
he saw brought a scream to his lips. Hanging from a hook in the roof of the
wardrobe was a human being. A man.

Or at least the skin of one. The face, the skin covering the skull, and the
rest of the body hung in the wardrobe, like an overcoat waiting to be put on.
Gingerly Stimson touched the thing. It crackled to the touch as if alive with static
electricity. Yet the skin seemed to be made of some soft, plastic material.

It was the skin of Klout the lawyer. And yet it wasn't from any dead body.
This skin had never covered a human being. It was merely an envelope. A
disguise. But for what?

Stimson didn't wait to find out. He backed out of Klout's room and left the
cabin immediately. He decided that he would rather face the Argolin than the
creature that used that thing hanging in the wardrobe. He could not imagine what
kind of creature it might be.

He was soon to find out.
Once in the lines between the cabins Stimson took to his heels, determined

to put as much distance as he could between Brock's cabin and himself. The
creature saw him leave the cabin and pursued him swiftly on green, scaly feet.
The creature ran down the corridor parallel to Stimson. It could see its prey
between the cabins and tents. It moved faster than the Terran, and therefore
entered the Great Recreation Hall before him.

It saw, wrapped around on the crystal statues of Argolin heroes, a long
woollen object. It was the Doctor's scarf. It was ideal for its purpose. The creature
took the scarf betwen two clawed hands and waited, poised behind a pillar.

As Stimson emerged into the Great Hall, the creature launched itself at him.
It wrapped the scarf round the Terran's throat and pulled tighter and tighter. One
bony knee was thrust into the small of Stimson's back. Desperately, with
weakening fingers, the man tore at the scarf which was choking him.

The hourglass was placed in the centre of the six tachyon projectors. The
sand was running from the upper vessel of the glass into the lower vessel. 'All
right,' said Romana. 'Switch on.'

Hardin slowly fed the power into the projectors. At first nothing happened.
The projectors began to glow; the sand continued to run through the hourglass.
But when power had built up sufficiently, the hourglass was suddenly surrounded
by a nimbus of light. Then a curious thing occurred. The sand began to flowmore
slowly through the neck of the glass. Until at last it fell into the vessel beneath
grain by grain. Then it stopped. A few grains of sandwere trapped halfway down,
falling into the lower vessel. They floated as if riding on an invisible cloud.



'Perfect,' said Romana. 'Hold it there.'
'Stasis,' declared Hardin.
They both studied the phenomenon.
Looks like it,' agreed Romana. 'You see what we've done is brought that

time-the time within the hourglass-to a stop. That's all. The question is, can we
turn back that time to the point where the sand was before it began to fall?'

'Let's try,' suggested Hardin.
So they did —and a circuit burned out.
'I don't understand,' complained Romana.
'Neither do 1,' agreed Hardin. 'In theory this whole apparatus should

function perfectly. Yet it doesn't. Why not?'
There's only one way to find out, Hardin. Check back. Check it all over

again. And then again-if it still doesn't work. That's one thing I've learned from
the Doctor - when to check your facts and when to go on faith alone.

'Now,' she went on, 'is the time to check.'
The Doctor meanwhile had left Mena resting in the boardroom surrounded

by Argolin medical orderlies. He had come down to the Great Recreation Hall,
determined to investigate the generator while everyone else was occupied.

He studied the diagnostic display panel above the computer console and
punched a few keys.

On the panel appeared the words: OVER-RIDE FAIL SAFE. OVER-RIDE
FAIL SAFE.

Then the words: ELIMINATE INTRUDER ELIMINATE INTRUDER.
'So that's how it was done,' said the Doctor. 'Fascinating. And most

ingenious. All pre-planned.'
'Doctor.'
The Doctor turned round to find that a group had gathered behind him-a

group consisting of Pangol, Brock and various guides. They carried a stretcher
on which lay the body of Stimson. Wound tightly round the Terran's throat, so
tightly his eyes bulged out of their sockets, was the Doctor's scarf. Stimson had
been strangled with the Doctor's scarf.

'This is your scarf, isn't it?' asked Pangol.
'Yes,' said theDoctor, 'for the umpteenth time it's my scarf. I've never denied

that-not once over the past hour or so.'
They had long since moved back inside the boardroom, but in the course

of time the atmosphere had deteriorated considerably. The Doctor was on trial,
and the Argolin wanted blood. His, preferably.

'Do you deny that your scarf was the one that throttled Henrick Stimson
to death?'

'No,' said the Doctor.
'It was found wrapped round the deceased's neck.'
'Then the scarf is guilty,' snapped the Doctor. 'Arrest it.'
No one was amused.
The Doctor looked round the cold, proud, intent faces of the Argolin who

stood beside Mena. They gave the impression of waiting, ready, like good
soldiers, to go out and do her bidding. The Doctor had the feeling that no matter
what her orders they would obey. Without question, almost without thought. No
wonder the Argolin had been the greatest warriors in the Galaxy. He glanced



uneasily-up at the great Helmet of Theron which dominated the boardroom, like
an ancient curse.

'Let us go over the facts of the case once again,' said Mena in a feeble voice.
They had been working for several hours. Romana had checked every item

of equipment and suggested various changed in the micro-circuitry. And now the
experiment had reached a crucial phase. The sand in the hourglass hung in mid
air: frozen. And yet, as Romana knew, each grain was still in motion, still falling
but infinitely slowly. In the space within the hourglass, in the space bounded by
the six tachyon projectors, time had been slowed to such a point that a second
lasted for a day, an hour for nearly nine weeks.

'Ready?' asked Romana.
'Ready,' said Hardin.
In spite of all the improvements they had made he no longer had any

confidence in the equipment. Many times in his experiments he had reached this
point where it had seemed he was about to make the vital breakthrough. But at
the very moment when he had been on the verge of mastering the flow of Time
itself, something had always gone wrong.

'Start the recording now.'
Hardin switched on the recorder.
'I thought the Doctor was going to come down and help us,' he said.
'He was. I don't know where he's got to. I expect .he'll turn up when all the

hard work's been done.'
She studied the sand in the hourglass. 'Increase the power slowly,' she

ordered. 'And stop when I tell you, A sudden surge might blow everything to
pieces.'

Hardin called out the readings on the dials, waiting each time for the figures
to stabilize themselves, and then gradually increasing the power flow. The sand
in the hourglass remained static, frozen in the act of flowing into the lower vessel
of the glass.

At one point Romana noticed a faint blurring of the grains of sand, almost
a double image, as if for a fraction of a second there were two flows of sand
attempting to occupy the same space.

'Hold it steady,' she called to Hardin while she checked the tachyon
projectors.

When she looked again, the blurring had ceased. Each grain of sand hung
poised in the throat of the glass, falling with infinite slowness.

Gradually Hardin built up the power.
'Reverse phase!' ordered Romana. 'Now!'
At first there was a slight flurry in the falling sand, as if someone was

blowing upon it. Then something very strange occurred. The sand began to flow
upwards. It was being sucked into the upper vessel of the glass.

Hardin and Romana watched the hourglass closely.
'We've done it,' he whispered. 'We've turned Time back on itself.'
'You see,' said Romana. 'Your theory's correct, your equipment works,

your-experiment is a success. And you haven't had to cheat.'
Hardin grinned. 'Let's go and tell Mena,' he said.



Laughing, they switched off the equipment and left the laboratory. Hardin
paused at the door and looked back. The sand still remained in the upper vessel
of the hourglass, unaffected by the normal laws of gravity.

'What's wrong?' asked Romana.
'Nothing,' he said. 'Not a thing.'
He closed the door behind them.
Ten minutes after they had gone something happened inside the hourglass.

Gravity reasserted itself: the sand suddenly flowed downwards into the lower
vessel. In slow motion the upper part of the glass then buckled inwards. As the
upper vessel imploded, the lower exploded, scattering sand and shards of glass
over the laboratory.

The Doctor was annoyed-and, moreover, bored. Everyone knows the law
is an ass. But Argolin justice seemed to have longer ears than most. Certainly
it was quite remarkably tedious. As far as the Doctor could see, every Argolin
had the right to offer comment, opinion or even actual evidence on the case in
question. And it seemed to the Doctor that practically everyone on Argolis was
eager to avail him or herself of the opportunity.

'Evidence?' snapped the Doctor irritably as an Argolin worthy offered some
particularly tendentious peice of hearsay. 'You surely don't call that evidence,
do you? Just a collection of uncorroborated rubbish. Purely circumstantial. Not
enough to hang a hat on -let alone me.'

Mena reproved him. 'A murder has been committed,' she said.
'And the murderer found,' observed Brock.
'That has yet to be decided,' said Mena.
Pangol had a suggestion. 'In ancient times,' he announced, 'when the great

Theron was alive, he threw a man into a fiery furnace or a lake, and let the
elements decide his guilt or innocence.'

But the Doctor wasn't impressed. 'They used to do that on Earth once,' he
declared. 'With witches.

Didn't prove anything though-except that some women could swim better
than others.

'However if you're absolutely set on that sort of thing,' he added, 'there's
an odd-looking blue box parked in the Great Recreation Hall. You could lock
me and Romana in it-and see what happens. If it vanishes, we're innocent; if it
doesn't we're guilty.'

But unfortunately no one seemed to be interested in the proposition.
By the time Romana and Hardin returned to the boardroom the Doctor's

legal position was still no clearer. As owner of the scarf that had strangled
Stimson, he still remained chief suspect. But since no one had seen him do the
deed and since no one could offer a convincing motive as to why he should want
to throttle the Terran to death, the case-such as it was-remained unproven.

Mena greeted the arrival of Romana and Hardin with some relief. Now the
ageing process had begun she found it harder and harder to concentrate for any
length of time on one subject.

' Romana's solved the wave equations for all four dimensions,' he declared.
Mena looked at him blankly.
'It means that the machine actually can reverse the time flow,' he explained.

'Which means that it can rejuvenate tissue. It could rejuvenate you.'



'Probably,' added Romana, aware that Hardin was making as yet
unsubstantiated claims. After all they had not tested the machine with a living
organism.

Mena found the whole idea difficult to grasp. 'I am dying,' she said. 'I know
that. My metabolic rate has begun to speed up. Do you mean to say that you
could stop the process?'

'Stop it?' cried Hardin. 'We could reverse it! Make you twenty, thirty years
younger.'

'Possibly,' interjected Romana.
'Very possibly,' she added, 'after we've made a few tests with living

organisms.'
Pangol laughed mirthlessly. 'You want to test a living organism,' he said.

'So do we.' He indicated the Doctor. 'What about him?' Trial by ordeal. It's the
ancient Argolin way.'

'You must have lost a lot of litigants over the years,' observed the Doctor.
'At least we don't need any court of appeal on Argolis.'
Much to Romana's horror, Mena and the assembled Argolin thought it the

ideal solution. The Doctor would be the guinea-pig in Hardin's test.
'But there isn't room in the laboratory,' objected Hardin. 'The Doctor won't

fit into an hourglass.'
'As I understand it,' said Pangol, 'all you need for your process to work are

tachyon projectors. Right?'
Hardin nodded.
'Then use the recreation generator. There are twenty-five projectors

incorporated into that.'
So it was decided that the Doctor would submit to trial in the generator.
The Doctor, however, was less than enthusiastic about the idea.
Don't worry,' Romana told him.
'Well not much; she added. 'We know the technique works. But I doubt if

it will take more than ten or twelve years off your age.'
'You're sure of that?' demanded the Doctor.
'No. But it's probably only a temporary effect anyway,' she replied. 'It's not

likely you'll get total tissue regeneration.'
The Argolin were arguing the legal niceties of his case. The Doctor held

up his hand. 'Am I correct in assuming that if I survive this ordeal by tachyon
generator, then I am deemed to be innocent of the crime of which I am accused?'
he asked.

'That is the legal position according to ancient Argolin law,' agreed Mena.
'Good,' said the Doctor. 'Then I volunteer for the test. Indeed, I insist upon

it.' He extended his arms to the Argolin Security guides. 'Lead me to the
generator.'

Romana took Hardin to one side. 'We ought to record this,' she remarked.
'You're needed here to make sure Pangol programmes the generator computer
correctly. I'll go down to the laboratory and switch on the recorder.'

The Argolin had a talent for parades and processions - no doubt the result of
their military tradition. They fell into formation around the Doctor, and in slow
time, with everyone - except the Doctor-in step, marched down to the Great Hall.



At the door to the recreation generator the Doctor turned tomake a speech to
his Argolin audience. 'I am innocent of the murder of the Earthling,' he declared.
'The generator will prove it.' He bowed to his audience and shut the door of the
generator behind him.

When Romana opened the door of the laboratory, an extraordinary sight
met her eyes. The exploding lower vessel of the hourglass had been trapped in
an expanding time bubble. The flying sand and shards of glass were frozen in
mid air, trapped like flies in amber. They hung there as if caught by the lens of
a camera. But when Romana wonderingly touched one of the particles of glass,
it disintegrated into dust.

Realizing the significance of what had happened, she turned and ran from
the room.

'Doctor!' she cried. 'Don't!'
But she was too late.
Pangol was already activating the recreation generator when Romana

reached the Great Hall.
Lights were flashing on the control console. The bubble screen was filled

with a kind of grey smoke.
Ignoring Pangol, Romana hit the stop button on the generator's console.
The screen, went dark.
Romana tugged at the door of the generator. At last, with agonizing

slowness, it opened.
'Doctor,' she cried, 'are you all right?'



7. Mirror, Mirror, on the Wall

Yes,' said the Doctor. 'I think so. A bit out of breath, of course. And my
legs feel strange.' He looked round the circle of anxious faces. 'What's wrong?'
he demanded. 'Why are you looking at me like that?'

He put his hand to his face. The skin of his cheeks felt rough and hard. He
looked at his hands. The fingers were gnarled and twisted, like oak twigs. The
skin on the back of his hands was blotched with brown spots.

He had no mirror. But the exterior of the generator was covered in black,
shiny glass. He turned and peered shortsightedly at his reflection.

A bent, wrinkled, white-haired figure stared back at him.
Who was it? It couldn't be him surely. But it was. A terrible caricature of

himself stared back at him.
'Is that me?' he asked wonderingly.
'There must have been a hardware malfunction,' said Romana almost in

tears.
'But I've got so old.' He continued to stare at his reflection. 'Why should it

have this effect? It doesn't make sense.' He frowned desperately, trying to whip
his failing memory into life. 'There was something I was going to check when
I was in there.'

'What?' asked Romana.
'I can't remember,' he said. Mena patted the Doctor's hand comfortingly.
'You're not well, Doctor,' she said. 'Go and lie down in one of the cabins.'
He's still on trial for murder,' objected Pangol.
'I thought that was his trial!' snapped Romana. 'Trial by ordeal.'
'It was,' replied Pangol. 'And how would you describe the verdict?' He

turned to the Security guides. 'Confine them both.'
The guides looked to Mena for confirmation. But she was leaning on

Hardin's arm, gasping for breath. At last she nodded.
'Very well. I declare a limitation on them.'
With Romana holding one arm and a Security guide the other the Doctor

shuffled slowly towards the cabins.
'What's a limitation?' he asked.
'A simple form of restraint,' explained the guide. 'Quite painless. Unless you

do something stupid.'
The Doctor paused and cupped one hand to his ear. Eh?'
'Your movements are proscribed,' said the guide in a louder voice.

'Programmed. It's as if you were on a chain. Except there's no chain.'
The Doctor shook his head blankly. But he found out soon enough. Vargos

was waiting for them in the cabin. He carried two ornate silver collars. One he
clipped round Romana's neck; the other he fitted onto the Doctor's wrinkled
throat.

'You'll find them quite comfortable to wear, so long as you keep within the
limits ordained for you,' he explained. 'The collars are programmed to forbid you
access to certain parts of the Leisure Hive. For example, you are forbidden to



enter the Great Recreation Hall where your blue box stands or the laboratories
or the board room or the shuttle station.

Otherwise you are free to roam where you like.
'What happens if we go into a forbidden area?' demanded Romana.
'The collar will contract around your neck. It will squeeze tighter and tighter

until it chokes you to death.'
There was a choking sound from theDoctor. They turned to find him tearing

at his collar, his face contorted in agony.
The collar also contracts if you attempt to remove it,' remarked Vargos.

'Take your hands away, Doctor.'
The Doctor obeyed and suddenly found he was no longer choking.
'It really is quite simple,' said Vargos. 'Behave yourself and you feel no

discomfort. But put one foot outside your prescribed area and you will be
unconscious within two minutes; dead in three.'

When Argolin had gone, the Doctor inspected his collar in the mirror.
Gingerly he put up his hand to touch it, then stopped. He had caught sight of his
own reflection. Good Lord, he thought, that old man is me. It was almost like a
regeneration, where quite suddenly you experienced a total physical change. A
new body, in fact. And when you first looked in the mirror, you didn't recognize
yourself. He regarded his white hair and wrinkled skin with distaste. I don't
recognize you, old man, he thought.

'Do you think I look twelve hundred and fifty?' he asked Romana, turning
his head this way and that. His neck was as scrawny as an underfed chicken's.

'Be honest,' he said.
'You don't look a day over a thousand,' she replied lightly.
But the Doctor was in nomood for pleasantries. 'We've got to do something.

And soon. Because I don't know how long I've got. It's difficult to work out the
life-expectancy of a Time Lord in any one body. Still, if looks are anything to
go by, I'll be lucky to see the week out in this one.'

'If only we could get you back into the generator and reverse the process.'
'Brilliant,' said the Doctor sourly. 'To get near the generator we've got to get

out of these collars first. How do we do that?'
Romana didn't reply. Gently, using one finger, she touched her collar and

immediately felt it contract round her neck. No, it wasn't going to be easy.
Brock meanwhile had been investigating the situation at the shuttle service

desk. He had been watching queues of holidaymakers trying to get a seat.
'Its a mass exodus,' he reported back to Mena. 'Everyone's leaving, or trying

to. And I can't say I blame them. There have been two murders and a nasty
accident in one day. It's enough to put anyone off their holiday. And mark my
words, once the visitors leave here they'll never come back.'

'I think you may be exaggerating—'
'Do you? Take a look.' Brock switched on the boardroom video screens.
A milling crowd of holidaymakers could be seen fighting for places in the

queue for shuttle tickets. There was an air of barely repressed hysteria about the
scene.

'Rats leaving a sinking ship. Not,' he went on, 'that I'm criticizing rats. If
a ship is sinking, it makes good sense to get off it. And if there is a murderer



loose on Argolis, why hang around and run the risk of becoming Victim Number
Three?'

'What can we do?' asked Mena.
'Sell Argolis now before the Foamasi get to hear about all this.'
Mena shook her head.
'Sell,' pleaded Brock. 'All you have to do is to sign the contract. Let the

Foamasi sort out the problems.'
Mena pointed to the video screen. 'If only we could find some way of

restoring their confidence in the Leisure Hive,' she said.
'Give them justice,' suggested Pangol. 'A public trial followed by a public

execution. We have caught the murderers. We have them under limitation. Let
the visitors see them pay for their crimes with their lives.'

'The Doctor and Romana?'Mena stared at Pangol in horror. 'But he survived
trial by ordeal. And we have no evidence at all against her.'

He pointed to the struggling mass of holidaymakers. 'They don't care about
evidence. What they want is instant justice. Then the rats will feel safe.

'In any case,' he went on, 'who's going to miss an alien Doctor from some
tinpot planet?'

When Hardin entered the cabin where the Doctor and Romana were, he
found the former trying to remove his limitation collar.

'Try this key,' said Hardin. 'I borrowed it from the Security Office while all
the guides were busy trying to control the crowds round the shuttle desk.'

He quickly released the other two from their collars.
'Look,' he explained. 'I need your help. I think we could save Mena-stop the

cellular degeneration-if we can use the full power of the generator—'
'Ever thought why they call it that?' remarked the Doctor sitting up with

some difficulty.
'What?'
The generator. The recreation generator.'
Hardin looked at the aged, white-haired figure squatting on the floor. Better

humour the old chap, he thought.
No,' he replied kindly. 'Why do they call it that?'
'Recreation.'
'Recreation?' repeated Hardin. He looked for I elucidation to Romana. She

shrugged.
'It means creating things anew.'
'What things?'
'New things,' said the Doctor vaguely. 'New creations.'
Hardin nodded. Humour him, he thought. Poor old fellow, his brain's gone.
'It doesn't matter,' said the Doctor. 'Just bear the thought in mind.'
So this is what it's like being old, he reflected. Everyone thinks you are a

candidate for the funny farm just because you have a few white hairs and are a
bit forgetful now and again.

Brock was pushing to close the deal with Mena. Her strength was failing
fast, but she was Heresiarch of Argolis, and as such her agreement was required
before the contract could be signed. She peered at the document, desperately
trying to concentrate.



'The Foamasi are offering excellent terms,' he declared. 'Considering that
as a Leisure Planet Argolis isn't exactly amongst the top money-spinners in the
galaxy.'

'It means the end of our planet.'
'Which is finished anyway.'
'The Foamasi expect us to pack our bags and become galactic gypsies?'
'Rich galactic gypsies, Mena.'
'Suppose we stay?'
Brock sighed and shook his head. 'Don't you understand?' he said. 'You don't

have that kind of choice. In a few months' time you'll be faced with the same
problem. You'll still have to leave because the Hive is crumbling and you can't
afford to repair it. What's more, you won't have thirty trillion galactic credits to
cushion the shock.'

'There is an alternative,' said Mena. 'When the day comes, we can open the
airlocks, and together the last of the Argolin will walk out onto the surface of
our planet for the last time.'

Brock stared at her incredulously. 'You mean you'd all rather commit
suicide than go off and live on some other planet. I don't understand you people.
Tell me, what is so special about this place? The atmosphere's poisonous; the
landscape's just sand and cinders, and not much of that. What is the attraction?'

'This is Argolis,' replied Mena.
Meanwhile Pangol had been studying the contract. It was stamped with a

curious seal consisting of interlocking hexagons.
'This isn't an official Foamasi Government document!' he announced.
'Did I say it was?' demanded Brock. 'If you must know, this is a private deal.

The offer is being made by a group of concerned Foamasi business creatures.'
Pangol pointed out the name on the contract. 'The West Lodge?'
Brock nodded. 'That is the title of their organization. Does it matter what

they call themselves?'
But Pangol still wasn't satisfied. 'What do they propose to do with our

planet?' He flourished the document. 'They don't explain that here.'
^They don't have to, Pangol. That's because what you're holding is a

contract to purchase - not an application for building permission. And don't ask
me what they propose to build either,' continued Brock. 'Because I don't know.'

He drew a deep breath. Don't get angry, he told himself. Keep your temper.
It's just Pangol behaving like a typical Argolin.

'Look,' he said. 'Let's be honest. Forgetting suicide for the moment, you
have two choices as I see it-bankruptcy or the Foamasi. In your position I know
which I'd choose.'

'There is another way,' declared Pangol. 'We can build the new Argolis.'
The corridor between the cabins was clear. There was no one about. The

holidaymakers were all in the First Observation Hall, while all available Security
guides were trying to preserve some semblance of order. It wasn't easy.

No one therefore raised the alarm when Hardin and the two prisoners
emerged from the cabin. Hardin and Romana each took the Doctor by an arm
and helped him down the corridor.

He suddenly paused.
'Where are we going?'



'To the generator,' said Romana.
'It was your idea, Doctor,' said Hardin.
The Doctor nodded and tried to look as if he knew what he planned to do

once he got there. The truth was he didn't. He recalled that he had had some plan
back there in the cabin. But what it was he couldn't for the life of him remember.

'Don't worry,' he told the others. 'It'll come back to me.'
Brock was unimpressed by Pangol's rhetoric. The new Argolis,' he sneered.

'What's that?'
'It is waiting to be born.'
'I'm delighted to hear it,' declared the Terran. hope you'll call me when it

happens. In fact, I wouldn't miss it for the worlds - because it will need a real
miracle to bring it about.

'Forgive me for reminding all you nice people,' he went on, 'but this is a
sterile planet. You are a sterile race. There hasn't been an Argolin born here, or
anywhere else for that matter, since the War. And that was forty years ago.'

'You're wrong, Mr Brock.'
'About the War?'
Pangol smiled. 'I'm not over forty,' he said. 'I'm twenty-five. How do you

explain that?'
Night on Argolis was perhaps even more spectacular than the day. At night

the 'jewels of Argolis', as some long-forgotten poet had christened them - the
seven Argolin moons — reflected light from the suns. The rainbow-hued
atmosphere of the planet, the ever-changing kaleidoscope of colours, was
transmuted into tones of blue and silver and grey as the moonlight was refracted
by the dust clouds.

Argolis, thought Romana, was one of the most beautiful planets she had
ever seen, particularly if you saw it from behind glass. She, Hardin and the
Doctor had paused in the shadow of thewall of theGreat RecreationHall, and she
was staring upwards through the dome at the night sky. The Doctor meanwhile
was leaning against the wall panting for breath. He was discovering that
adventure was hard on the lungs and the knees at his age. The other two waited
for him to recover.

'In a minute,' he gasped. 'Just give me a minute. I'll be all right.'
They waited.
Facts,' he said at last. 'Fact: the Argolin have devoted years to research and

vast sums of money they can ill afford to the study of tachyonics. Yet apparently
all they have got out of it is a cabinet of illusions, which may be ingenious but
is hardly worth all that expenditure.'

They nodded.
'Fact: the Argolin are sterile. Fact: there are no children on Argolis.'
He stood gasping for breath, like a fish out of water.
'Well?' demanded Romana. 'What's your conclusion?'
The Doctor shook his head. 'I can't remember,' he confessed. 'I've forgotten.'

Then his eyes lit up. 'No, I haven't. The tachyon recreation generator must
represent some attempt on the part of the Argolin to solve their population
problem.'

But Romana remained unconvinced. 'A machine won't give them children.
No machine can create life from scratch.'



'You're forgetting the significance of the name.'
'What name?' asked Romana.
'Recreation?' suggested Hardin.
'Right,' agreed the Doctor. 'The recreation generator. It must have some

capacity for cellular reduplication.'
'Cloning?'
'No. The tachyon particle is too unstable.'
'Then what?'
The Doctor sighed and closed his eyes. 'I don't know,' he said at last. 'I've

forgotten.' He sounded weary. The effort of concentration had proved too much
for him.

'We had better find out then,' she said.
Hardin volunteered for the task of going into the generator, and Romana

was tempted to let him do it
But she knew that in the end there was only one of them who could afford

the risk.
'It has to be me,' she said. 'Unfortunately.'
'Why?' asked Hardin.
' Because the Doctor's too—'
'Say it,' snapped the Doctor. 'Too old!'
'If there's another tachyon surge while you're inside, you'd never survive it.'
The Doctor mumbled grumpily to himself, but he did not contradict her.
'What about me?' demanded Hardin.
'You're a Terran.'
'What's that got to do with it?'
'Because you've only a limited life span. You can't afford to age five

hundred years in a few minutes.'
'Can you?' asked Hardin. 'Yes,' said Romana. 'Unfortunately.'
What will I look like when I'm 650, she wondered? Unconsciously she

stroked her long blonde hair. Will it go white? Will I be bald?
The Doctor pointed to the generator. 'Guards,' he said. They looked round

and saw that twoArgolin Security guides had taken up positions by the generator.
Brock was confused. He looked to Mena for assistance. 'I don't understand,'

he said. 'If the Argolin have been sterile for forty years, yet Pangol's only twenty-
five...

'Isn't he a pure Argolin?' he asked.
Pangol laughed. 'I'm the purest Argolin of them all,' he declared. Brock

again appealed to Mena. 'Was he adopted?'
But she did not reply.
'I always thought he was your child, yours and Morix's.'
Mena would not meet his eyes.
'I am the first of the newArgolin,' declared Pangol proudly. He drew himself

to his full height. ' I am born the of the Generator.'
The Security guides were obviously on duty for the next few hours. They

did not move from the generator.
'What we need,' said Hardin, 'is a diversion.'



The Doctor, who had been showing signs of dozing off whilst leaning
against the wall, suddenly jerked awake. 'Did I ever tell you what I thought the
generator was really designed for?' he asked.

'You couldn't remember,' said Romana.
'Oh.'
The Doctor closed his eyes and began to snore.
Just at that moment two Science guides appeared. Their job was to carry

out daily maintenance on the generator.
'That does it,' said Romana, not without a certain relief in her voice. I'll

never get past the four of them.'
The Doctor woke up.' What we need, he said, is a diversion. Come on.'
And before the others could stop him he started to walk across to the

maintenance crew. He waved to them. 'Hello,' he called. 'Could I have a word?'
'He's gone mad,' whispered Hardin. 'He must have done. Senile dementia,

that's what it is. It attects people when they get old.'
They watched the Doctor's rather arthritic progress across the Great

Recreation Hall. 'What's he going to do?'
'Heaven knows,' replied Romana. 'But no matter what it is-come on!'
Together she and the Terran scientist began to make their way, unseen,

towards the generator.
The Security guides observed the Doctor's slow approach with some

suspicion. Obviously he was no longer under official limitation, otherwise he
would have worn a programmed collar. Nevertheless it didn't pay to get careless.
They decided to keep an eye on him.

The two-man maintenance crew were busy running a routine computer
check. The Doctor paused to chat to them. The Security guides could not hear
what he was saying, but one of the men shook his head and pointed to the
computer. The Doctor took a piece of chalk out of his pocket and began to scrawl
equations on the top of the control console. The maintenance men studied them,
scratched their heads and began to argue with him.

Meanwhile at Romana's urging, Hardin emerged from the shadows and
began to stroll across the Great Hall in the direction of the generator.

Approached from two different directions at once the Security guides were
distracted. When one of the maintenance men suddenly moaned and collapsed
onto the floor, they left their posts and came over to see if they could help.

'Poor chap,' said the Doctor sympathetically, I tried to introduce him to the
computer language they use on Hermes-4a. Must have been too much for him.
Overheated his brain, I expect.'

While the Security guides were trying to revive the unconscious
maintenance man, Romana was able to slip unobserved inside the generator.

Pangol smiled at Brock. His eyes glittered like chips of glass. 'I think it's
time, my fat Terran friend,' he said that you learned something of the forbidden
secrets of the Argolin.'

He put an arm round the accountant's broad shoulders. Surprised at the
unexpected physical contact with someone from a race as noted for their reserve
as the Argolin were, Brock recoiled. Pangol laughed. 'Don't worry, my friend,' he
continued, 'you won't be expected to undergo any painful initiation ceremonies.'

'Pangol, is this wise?' asked Mena.



Pangol ignored her.
'After the Foamasi War,' he said, 'the Argolin knew they were doomed to

extinction within a generation. Unless they could find some other way of
reproducing themselves. As you know, virtually the only Argolin survivors of
the War were all members of the crew of Morix's hyperspace war galley.'

'I was communications officer,' said Mena.
'The scientific officer aboard The Rage of Theron - that was the name of

Morix's ship-was called Verdrix,' went on Pangol. 'He devoted himself to the
problem of the survival of our race. His answer was the generator.'

'What happened to him?' asked Brock.
'He died,' replied Mena. 'He was the first of the Argolin to age.'
'But he had completed the generator,' said Pangol. 'So twenty-six years ago

the Argolin were at last ready for the great experiment.'
Mena spoke. Her voice was feeble but clear. Her eyes looked inwards, fixed

only on the past. 'None of us will ever forget that day. For the first time it seemed
as if a great dark cloud was lifting from us. It seemed as if once again the voice
of our young would be heard on Argolis.'

'The Argolin,' explained Pangol, 'and there were many more of them then
than there are today, the Argolin donated living cells from their own bodies.
Thousands of cells. They placed them in the generator. The aim was to clone
them. The cloned cells would then be incubated, fed on nutrients, until they
became embryos and ultimately foetuses.'

Brock looked puzzled. ' Where are these clones?' he asked. 'What happened
to them?'

Pangol did not reply at first. Then he said: 'The tachyon is an inherently
unstable particle. At that time no one realized how unstable it was.'

'What about the cloning?' demanded Brock.
'There were many failures.'
'I don't understand.' Brock turned to Mena. 'What does he mean?'
Mena sighed. 'Poor, dead, disfigured creatures.'
'Mutants most of them, I imagine,' said Pangol. 'Few survived birth. Those

that did were usually better off dead.'
'What about you, Pangol?'
'I was the sole survivor,' replied the young Argolin. 'The generator made

me. The generator gave birth to me. I am the Child of the Generator.'
As he spoke, he switched the boardroom video screens to the Great

Recreation Hall. All cameras covered the shining black bulk of the generator.
One of them picked up an all-too-familiar figure. Bent, white haired, the Doctor
could be seen at the computer control console.

Pangol reacted immediately.
'What's he doing there?' he cried. He pressed the alarm button and ran from

the boardroom.
When the alarm sounded in the Great Recreation Hall, Hardin half dragged

the Doctor away from the generator.
'But Romana's in there,' protested the Doctor.
'If the Argolin see us hanging around, they'll figure that out for themselves,'

snapped Hardin.



Whether it was the logic of his argument or the fact that for one terrible
moment he could not remember who Romana was, the Doctor allowed Hardin
to lead him over to the elevator which took them down to the laboratory. It was
fortunate that he did so-because just as the elevator doors closed behind them,
Pangol, followed by a group of Security guides, entered the Hall.

On the order from Pangol the guides split up to search every corner of the
Great Hall. 'Find them!' he cried. 'The Doctor. The girl. Hardin. I want them
found.'

Afraid that the Doctor might have sabotaged the computer of the generator,
Pangol went over to check it for himself. He punched out his instructions. On
the diagnostic panel flashed the words: SECURITY. STATUS UP-DATE.

Pangol waited. 'Did you see anyone go into the generator?' he asked the
maintenance man.

'No, sir.'
'All the same someone did get inside.' He pointed to the panel. On it

appeared the words: INTRUDERS. INTRUDERS. INTRUDERS.
Some of the Security guides were about to open the door of the generator,

when Pangol stopped them.
'I know who's in there,' he said. 'It seems a pity to disturb him. No, let him

have his fun. And I think we ought to have a little, too'
Pangol busied himself adjusting the various settings on the generator. In

spite of what had happened to him the last time he had entered the generator,
when he had emerged five hundred years older, the Doctor had gone back inside.
He had survived the first visit. But Pangol determined to make quite sure that
he wouldn't survive his second. Pangol doubted if even the Doctor's remarkable
constitution could withstand ageing a further two thousand years. Still they
would soon see.

Pangol switched on the power supply. He pressed the start button and felt
the generator surge into life.

As it happened, at that moment the Doctor was sitting on a stool in the
laboratory, trying to get his breath back. 'There's no doubt about,' he panted. 'All
this rushing about takes it out of you when you get to be twelve hundred or so.'

'Do you think Romana's all right?' asked Hardin.
'She knows what she's doing,' replied the Doctor. 'At least I hope she does.

Anyway, if she doesn't, she'll make a very attractive old lady.'
The door of the laboratory slid noiselessly open. There was a curious

clicking noise behind them. The Doctor and Hardin leapt to their feet in alarm
at the creature that entered.

It was something like a Terran lizard in shape, but tall as a man and covered
with dark green scales. Two clawed hands gesticulated frantically, while from
the throat of the creature came a succession of clicking and whistling noises.

'What the devil is it?' demanded Hardin,
'I don't know,' replied Romana, emerging from behind the creature and

closing the door behind her. 'But at least he's a friend. He just saved my life. He
got me out of the generator just before Pangol started it up.'

The Doctor frowned. 'You mean he was already in the image chamber of
the generator when you got inside?'

Romana nodded.



'I wonder what our friend was doing there,' he mused.
The creature began to make a succession of whistling and clicking noises.
Is he in pain?' asked Romana.
'I think he's just trying to communicate.'
'Where's he from?' demanded Hardin. 'What is he?'
'I don't care what he is,' declared Romana, patting a scaly shoulder. 'He

saved my life, or at least saved me from becoming a very old lady.' She produced
a small object which she handed to the Doctor. 'And he found that in the Image
Chamber behind the second baryon shield.'

The creature whistled and clicked and gesticulated while the Doctor
inspected the object. It turned out to be a transparent box containing a complex
of slim gold leaves with a mirror on one side. The Doctor studies the box for
some time. Then he handed it back to Romana. 'What is it?' he asked.

A cell duplicator, of course,' she said. 'You ought to know that.'
Yes,' replied the Doctor. 'Of course I should. He sighed. 'It's just that I forget

lately.'
The creature seized the Doctor by the arm and drew him over to the video

screen. He pointed to the screen and then to the Doctor.
I wish I knew what you wanted, my friend, said the Doctor.
'Perhaps he wants to show us something on the screen,' suggested Hardin.
He switched on the video screen.
But the shots of the Great Recreation Hall were obviously not what the

creature wanted. He whistled and clicked briefly and shook his head.
It was only when Hardin switched them through to the boardroom that the

creature broke into a cacophany of clicks and whistles. He kept pointing to the
screen. Pangol and Brock could be seen arguing, while Mena lay back weakly
in her chair.

'Maybe he wants to talk to Mena,' said Romana.
The Doctor shook his head, 'It beats me,' he said.
Obviously despairing of making himself understood, the creature took the

Doctor by the hand and pulled him towards the. door.
'Come on!' cried the Doctor.
'Where to?' asked Hardin.
'Ask our scaly friend.'
The creature led the Doctor out of the laboratory, along the corridor and

into the elevator. The other two followed closely on his heels. The creature took
the elevator up three levels and then led them down another corridor.

'This leads to the boardroom,' complained Hardin.
The Doctor nodded. He was too out of breath to speak.
Hardin held Romana back for a moment. 'Are you sure this is a good idea?'

he whispered. 'How do you know we can trust this lizard?'
'He saved my life,' said Romana. 'That's good enough for me.'

'Did he?'
'What do you mean?'
'Well, you don't actually know what he was doing in the Image Chamber

of the generator in the first place. Do you?'



Before Romana could formulate a reply the creature flung open the
boardroom door.

Pangol and Brock looked up, startled.
The creature moved with extraordinary speed. Before anyone else had time

to react he launched himself into the attack. He seized the Terran accountant,
grappled him to the floor, and-to everyone's horror - forced one clawlike hand
down his throat.

Brock's screams were swiftly stifled.



8. The Foamasi

The whole attack was so swift, so merciless, that no one had a chance to go
to Brock's aid. Nor was anyone prepared for what happened next.

With a triumphant cacophany of whistles and clicks the creature held
something aloft. Something small and oval in shape. Something he had removed
from Brock's throat. Something which he proceeded to swallow himself.

The whistles and clicks suddenly died.
A voice said: 'Now at last I can speak to you.'
It was the creature.
Romana knelt beside the Terran accountant, who lay half-unconscious on

the floor. 'Are you all right?' she asked.
His lips moved, but no words came.
'Mr Brock.'
Then something very strange happened. When Brock tried to speak, all that

emerged was a series of whistles and clicks.
'It's all done by voice synthesizer,' explained the creature. 'Without his, our

friend here cannot make himself understood.'
Mena sounded bewildered, 'Are you saying that Mr Brock has some sort of

speech defect?' she asked.
'This isn't the real Brock,' replied the creature.With one knee on the chest of

the recumbent Terran, he was tugging at the skin at the base of the neck. 'You'll
find that the real Brock is alive and well and still living on Terra. In fact, he
never left there.'

'But that's impossible.'
'Check, if you don't believe me.'
'I don't understand,' protestedMena. 'We've had dealings with Brock for the

past ten years. I tell you that is him.'
There was a tearing sound.
'This,' said the creature, 'is the real face of the thing that you thought was

Brock.'
With a gesture the creature ripped away the face of the accountant. The

face came away like a mask. Underneath they could see green scaly skin and the
features of something that resembled a lizard. '

'These flesh suits are amazing. Accurate to a micron. Believe me, even
Brock's own mother wouldn't have been able to tell the difference between , the
real man and what inhabited this suit!'

The creature deftly skinned the recumbent figure, removing the humanoid
envelope that had formed such an impenetrable disguise for the green scaly
creature beneath.

'On my planet flesh suits were banned years ago,' observed the creature.
He fastened the false Brock's clawlike hands together with what looked like a
strip of double-sided adhesive tape. 'Of course, there are still craftsmen who, for
a price, will make one of these suits for you. But you will have to pay through
the nose for it.'

Casually he rolled up the Brock skin, like a pair of old overalls.



Romana touched the skin. It still felt warm and soft as if it were made from
incredibly fine suede.

'Originally these suits were designed for the professional assassins' market,'
he went on. 'The idea was that, dressed in the guise of your victim's mother or
best friend or even wife, the assassin could get close enough to make the kill.
Our guild of assassins were furious when the Government banned these suits.

That was in the bad old days,' he added.
'What planet?' asked the Doctor. 'What Government?'
The creature produced a small circular plaque. 'Those are my credentials,'

he said. 'I am an agent from the Foamasi Bureau of Investigation.'
'Foamasi!' cried Pangol. 'You mean that you are a Foamasi?' He clenched

his fists and glared at the creature. 'Your race destroyed this planet,' he shouted
furiously.

'Your race destroyed my planet,' snapped the Foamasi agent.
For a moment it looked as if the two might continue the war there and then.
Romana attempted to defuse the situation. She was also curious. She asked

Pangol. 'Didn't you know he was a Foamasi?'
'Of course not,' he replied. 'I never saw one before.'
She turned to the Foamasi agent. 'What about you?'
He shrugged his narrow shoulders. 'No Foamasi ever met an Argolin

before.'
Even though she was an experienced Time traveller and had journeyed vast

distances through Time and Space, Romana found it difficult to absorb the
information. 'Do you mean to say,' she enquired, 'that the Argolin and the
Foamasi virtually wiped each other out and yet they never even met? They never
saw each other face to face?'

'Why should they?' demanded Pangol. 'What do you expect in time of war-
a gilt-edged invitation? An official introduction? Shake hands and come out
fighting? The great Theron taught us that victory goes to him who is the swiftest
and the most ruthless.'

'Shoot first and ask questions afterwards. Is that it?' she said.
Pangol folded his arms across his chest and refused to reply.
'I think it's pathetic!' declared Romana.
The Doctor found old wars a boring and sometimes dangerous subject for

conversation. 'What happened to the Foamasi?' he asked, changing the subject.
The agent explained that after the Argolin War ('We call it the Foamasi

War,' snapped Pangol) few of his race were left alive. Moreover, due to a cruel
trick of Fate, most of those who did survive were criminals imprisoned in the
largest underground prison on Foamas.

'So we were left,' he continued, 'with the remains of a society which was
split between law and order on the one hand - represented by the surviving prison
officers-and the criminals on the other. They came to be known as the White and
the Black Foamasi.'

Hewent on to tell them how theWhites, though fewer in number, weremore
united than the Blacks, who were constantly rent by internal disputes. All the
great Foamasi criminal clans, or 'families' as they were called, were represented
amongst the survivors. In the past the clans had always devoted much of their
time trying to eliminate their rivals. Their surviving brethren therefore continued



the tradition. Ancient vendettas were pursued; old scores were settled; clan
fought clan even more savagely than before. In time the clans themselves
fragmented. They split up into smaller and smaller units, and thus could be
picked off by the White Foamasi.

Some years ago the Foamasi Bureau of Investigation had been formed, with
the object of breaking the power of the surviving clans-of which only two
remained-the Twin Suns and the West Lodge. 'This contract carries the West
Lodge crest,' said Mena.

'So does our friend,' observed the creature, turning the false Brock round
so that everyone could see the design of interlocking hexagrams tattooed on his
shoulder.

'He wanted to buy our planet,' declared Pangol.
The creature nodded. 'That's their usual approach. The West Lodge have

been buying several planets lately.'
'What's wrong with buying planets?' asked Romana.
'Nothing,' agreed the agent. 'Providing purchaser and vendor agree a price.

And providing the sale is according to galactic law. But the curious thing is that
the West Lodge have never had to complete a contract yet.'

'What do you mean?'
It seemed that the West Lodge's purchases always followed the same

pattern. Once they had located a suitable planet, they began discreet negotiations.
If in the course of these they met any opposition, their opponents were apt to die
in mysterious circumstances. There would also be a sudden spate of accidents.
Power surges, computer failures, minor epidemics, defences against natural
disasters unaccountably breached. Never any major calamities, but just enough
to persuade the vendor that his planet was a less than desirable place to live.

With a great show of good faith the West Lodge would then make the first
down-payment. Often a very generous sum. Say, three trillion galactic credits.
Which the by now disillusioned and often desperate population would eagerly
accept. Then, just as the second payment fell due, the planet would suffer some
major catastrophe, like a multiple comet strike or a space-born plague. It was
never the same catastrophe: on each occasion a different disaster would befall.
But whatever it was it wiped out the population.

Since they had made the down-payment in good faith and since it was
demonstrably no fault of theirs that they were unable to complete the contract,
under galactic law the West Lodge were entitled to claim the planet. Purchase
by default, it was called.

'All legal and above board.'
'I don't think I would call murdering the entire population of a planet legal,'

observed the Doctor.
'Neither would I,' agreed the creature. 'But apparently the computer which

drew up the law never considered that possibility. Probably it had never heard
of the Black Foamasi.'

'Do you mean that is what this creature'- Mena pointed to the false Brock
- 'would have done here?'

'Why should they treat Argolis differently from any other planet?' asked the
Foamasi agent. 'I believe you had already had some accidents and sudden deaths.
And you would have had more. Until no holidaymaker in his senses would want



to come here at all. The offer from the West Lodge would still be on the table,
and by now it would begin to look more and more generous. You would receive
the down-payment - and that would be the last of the Argolin.'

Mena looked round the boardroom. 'Where's Klout?' she asked. 'I haven't
seen him lately.'

'Klout?'
She pointed to the false Brock. 'His assistant. A lawyer. He never seemed

to talk.'
'Couldn't, I expect,' remarked the Foamasi.
'Without giving himself away. Probably didn't have a voice synthesizer.

Anyway he wouldn't need it. Klout will have been the sabotage expert and
assassin. TheWest Lodge usually start by sending in a two-man team. The heavy
brigade move in later.

'I'll order my men to find him.'
From under one of the large scales on his chest he took what looked like a

tiny bone flute. He put it to his lips and blew a note. It made no sound.
'Ultra high frequency sound,' he explained, replacing the flute. 'Only

Foamasi can hear it.'
At the sound of the flute call the other Foamasi agents began their search

for Klout. The flute had told them where to look. Klout was the sabotage expert.
He would be found in that part of the Leisure Hive where his expertise would
do most damage-in the corridors below the Great Recreation Hall, in the service
areas where the main power lines, communication channels, and life-support
systems were located.

Two of the agents caught him red-handed. He was in the act of placing
a small explosive charge in the air-purification plant. Challenged to halt in the
high-pitched series of whistles and clicks that composed the present Foamasi
language, Klout acted swiftly. He threw the limpet grenade at the agents.
Fortunately he had not yet primed the grenade, which therefore bounced
harmlessly off the wall beside them.

The grenade distracted them long enough for him to draw his electric
stiletto. But, before he could strike, one of the agents lobbed something that
resembled a ball of white wool at him. The moment the wool touched Klout it
unravelled, wrapping him in a tight white cocoon, like a butterfly or moth larva.
Struggle as he might, Klout could not move a muscle.

The two agents carried the cocooned Foamasi up to the boardroom, where
they found their superior in collision with Pangol.

Pangol was demanding that, since the false Brock and his henchmen had
broken Argolin law, they should stand trial on Argolis. However, the senior
Foamasi agent insisted that galactic law, not to mention Foamasi law, took
precedence under the circumstances. As he pointed out, it was not until he had
unmasked Brock that the Argolin were even aware that they had welcomed an
impostor into their midst. Certainly they could try the criminals after they had
served their sentences on one of the penal satellites of Foamas.

Mena was not disposed to argue the point. 'Let him have the two criminals,'
she told Pangol. 'So long as they stand trial somewhere, what does it matter
where?'

Romana and the Doctor accompanied the Foamasi to the shuttle bay.



'I must confess I was worried about the Argolin reaction to us,' remarked
the senior agent, as they walked down the corridor. 'In view of our past history I
was afraid we might meet a lot of opposition here. I am relieved it has all ended
so satisfactorily.'

'If it has ended, observed the Doctor.
'Oh, I assure you that with the arrest of these two miscreants, Argolis will

be in no more danger.'
'I wasn't thinking of Argolis.'
The senior agent paused. 'You think there might still be trouble?' he asked.
'Let's not cross any bridges until they're hatched,' replied the Doctor.
In the boardroom he would have found his worst fears confirmed.
Pangol was insisting that the aliens must not be allowed to leave Argolis.
'Why ever not?' asked Mena.
'They are spies.'
Mena wondered if the shock of meeting the Argolin's historic enemy for

the first time had not been too much for Pangol. He was after all the only child
of the Argolin. He had been brought up alone, without friends or confidants of
his own age, amidst a dying population, it was not surprising therefore that he
had become slightly paranoid.

The extent of his paranoia was to become clear only later.
Mena appealed to his reason. 'They are Government agents,' she said. 'You

saw their credentials; you heard what they said. '
'You mean you actually believed all that claptrap?' sneered Pangol.
'Why should they lie?'
'Didn't it occur to you that theirs was just the sort of story you would invent

if you wanted to provide a cover for your real purpose?'
'What purpose?' she demanded.
'The infiltration of Argolis.'
Pangol began to pace up and down the room, like a caged beast.
'It is perfectly clear,' he said. 'Those agents must have been sent ahead of

the main Foamasi force to report on our defences. They broke into the Hive, and
they have had every opportunity to discover our weaknesses. Once they report
back to their Government it is only a matter of time before the Foamasi launch
another full scale war.'

'But why?' she asked. 'Even if what you say were true, it must be obvious
to the Foamasi that we constitute no threat to them.'

' Order the Foamasi to be detained!' Pangol commanded.
Mena summoned all her strength. She tried to rise to her feet, but the effort

was too much for her. 'I am Heresiarch,' she said weakly. 'I decide the future of
Argolis-not you. In this I will be obeyed.'

Pangol looked round the faces of the other Argolin, then he stepped forward
and took down the Helmet of Theron from where it hung on the wall.

'Your time is over, old woman,' he said.
He placed the blackened duelling helmet on his head.
'All decisions are now in the hands of the great Theron.'
'No!' cried Mena. 'You must not wear the Helmet!'
'It is the symbol of Argolin power.'



'Theron worshipped war. It was through him that eventually we were
reduced to the sterile, ageing creatures we are today.'

Pangol looked down on her, his eyes glittering strangely through the
eyeholes in the helmet.

'We, Pangol, Child of the Generator, will fulfil Theron's dream of conquest.'
'How can you?' she asked, trying to reason with him. 'We have no army.'

She turned pleadingly to the other Argolin. 'This is madness.'
Pangol spoke, his words echoing oddly from within the helmet: 'We,

Pangol, will provide the greatest army Argolis has ever seen.'
The significance of his words dawned on her. She stared at him in horror.

'Do you mean that you have found a way to use the generator to... No, Pangol,
I beg you—'

Ignoring her, Pangol turned to the other Argolin. 'Do you obey the great
Theron?'

Old habits die hard. From forty years past the old Argolin military ethic
reasserted itself. It was as if all those years of being polite to holidaymakers, of
being the faceless servants to alien visitors, had fallen away. The iron discipline
that had made the Argolin so feared throughout the galaxy gripped them and
held them fast.

'An Argolin knight never refuses an order,' declared the Tenth Precept of
Theron.

'An Argolin knight obeys his leader without question,' runs the Eleventh.
'To die gloriously in battle against the enemies of Argolis is the greatest joy

an Argolin knight can hope to experience,' runs the Last Precept.
Vargos and the other Argolin, almost against their will, found themselves

making the ancient salute which acknowledges fealty in time of war: they struck
their left breast with their clenched right fist.

When she saw that, Mena knew she had lost.
The first sign the Doctor and the Foamasi had that the situation had changed

was when the automatic doors leading to the shuttle bays suddenly closed in
their faces.

'What's happening?' demanded the Foamasi agent.
'I don't know,' replied the Doctor.
Romana nudged him. 'I have a nasty feeling—' she said.
'We came to Argolis in peace,' protested the Foamasi. 'We came to save

them from the depredations of some of our own criminals. It was a simple police
action.'

'I'd keep trying to get that door open,' advised the Doctor. 'We'll go and see
what the Argolin are up to.'

'Tell them that under galactic law we have fuH diplomatic immunity,'
declared the Foamasi. 'Should anything happen to us my Government may feel
duty bound to take military action.'

The Doctor nodded. 'Use your shoulders,' he suggested. 'Put everything into
it. You might manage to get the doors open.'

Romana and the Doctor got to the Great Recreation Hall in time to see
Pangol's entrance. He wore the Helmet of Theron and was followed by a
procession of Argolin guides. They moved like zombies, ageing knights



hypnotized by ghosts from the past. It was as if the great Theron once more
commanded their lives.

Pangol paused and stretched wide his arms as if to encompass the
extraordinary vista visible through the glass of the dome.

'Wait!' he cried. 'There is the Argolin dawn.'
Gradually a deep red sunrise of spectacular luminosity, lit here and there

by green flashes of light, spread across the sky.
'It is the Dawn of the New Argolis.'
As the twin suns slowly rose in the northern hemisphere, Pangol cried out:

'The Rebirth begins!'
At that moment the Doctor collapsed. He slumped against a pillar, his face

grey and lined. He looked like a corpse. But incredibly he was still breathing.



9. Rebirth

Hardin found them in the Great Hall. Romana was trying to revive the
Doctor.

'We must do something,' she whispered. 'I don't think he can stand another
attack like this.'

Hardin had an idea. 'The laboratory. It's the only place we might be safe.
Let's take him there.

'Help me,' she said.
Together they half carried the Doctor to the elevator. They left Pangol, who

still sported the Helmet of Theron, trying to whip the Argolin into a burst of
military enthusiasm. While there was no doubt that the old martial spirit was
still present in many of the Argolin, increasing age had taken its toll. A high
percentage of his forces would never make the battlefield.

While Romana did her best to revive the Doctor, Hardin set up the
equipment in the laboratory.

'You know I've been thinking,' he said, 'what we need is a second Random
Field Frame. The one we've got just isn't powerful enough to hold the field stable
until we get proper cellular rejuvenation.'

'Where are we going to get a second Field Frame?' demanded Romana.
The Doctor suddenly roused himself. 'The TARDIS,' he said.
'What?'
'Use the Randomizer. It's easily adapted.' '
Romana considered the problem for a moment.
Then decided against it: 'It's too risky.'
'It's my only chance.'
She knew it was true. He looked so old that she felt he would crumble to

dust if she touched him.
Alone in the boardroom the ageing Mena watched on the video screens as

Pangol strutted around the Great Recreation Hall. Wearing the Helmet he looked
every inch the Argolin war leader.

'Guides of Argons,' he proclaimed, 'according to our ancient laws, we,
Pangol, are now your leader. We are the future. For what is about to happen,
and for the aeons that lie ahead, I demand-as is my right —your unquestioning
obedience... '

'I must stop this madness,' she muttered.
Mena rose unsteadily from her chair and took a few tottering steps towards

the door. Her legs gave way under her and she fell to the floor.
The faint sound of the elevator door closing caused Romana and Hardin to

look up from their deliberations. They realized the Doctor was no longer there.
She ran to the elevator, knowing she would be too late.

'I'll go after him.'
'No. I think I know where he's gone.'
She switched the video screen in the laboratory through to the Great Hall.

She cut from camera to camera, until she caught a fleeting glimpse of a familiar



figure. She switched to a closer shot, and was rewarded by a sight of the Doctor
shuffling towards the TARDIS.

'Oh, you fool! You crazy old fool!' she cried.
But of course the Doctor could not hear her.
Fortunately Pangol was in full flow. He had an attentive audience and had

no intention of cutting short his peroration. His back was to the Doctor, who
Romarta saw disappear into the TARDIS.

'The termination of our honoured Chairwoman, our late Heresiarch, is now
complete,' intoned the new Argolin leader. 'We shall remember her wise
guidance, her sense of justice, her moderation - all virtues appropriate to a time
of reconstruction. But that time is past... '

Hardin stared at the screen, unable to take in . Pangol's words. 'What does
he mean-Mena's termination? She can't be... surely she's not—'

Just as he left the laboratory she saw the Doctor again on the video screen.
He was emerging from the TARDIS. He carried something underneath his arm.
She saw that it was the Randomizer. He turned towards the camera for a moment,
and she could have wept when she saw his face. It was the face of a tired old
man who barely knew where he was. She could tell that he was on the verge of
another attack. Only sheer will-power kept him going. He paused for a moment,
then headed in the direction of the generator.

'No!' she cried when she realized his intention. 'Don't try and use the power
of the generator! Bring the Randomizer here.'

The Doctor kept on going.
She wanted to look away. But it was like watching someone leap off a tall

building. You knew you could not bear to witness the fall. Yet you stood, half-
hypnotized, impelled to watch.

A Security guide entered and spoke to the self-appointed Heresiarch. The
Foamasi shuttle was asking permission to take off. Pangol refused to give it.

'But, sir, they do have diplomatic priority,' said the guide.
'Not while I rule Argolis!'
The Doctor took advantage of the exchange to slip inside the generator.
As the door closed behind him, he seemed to lose his sense of purpose. For

a long moment he looked round the black glass panels of the image chamber,
trying to recall where he was. What am I doing here? he wondered. He frowned
and closed his eyes, concentrating desperately on his mission. He had had a plan.
But what was it?

H 'The anti-baryon shield,' he said at last. 'Yes, that was it. Wasn't it?'
His brain seemed to be composed of cotton wool. Where was the anti-

baryon shield? His mind was blank.
He took put his sonic screwdriver and clumsily tried to remove one of the

glass panels. But his gnarled fingers had no strength in them. At last he managed
to loosen the magnetic catch on a panel. Yet still it would not come. He used
both hands to prise it off-and lost his grip on the Randomizer. It fell to the floor
and shattered into a dozen pieces.

The suns of Argolis had risen almost clear of the horizon when Romana
reached the Great HalL Pangol was holding out his arms to the suns as if
welcoming their rays. She knew she did not have a moment to lose. There was



no time to create a diversion: no time for any clever plan. She ran through the
crowd in the Great Hall straight to the generator.

Two Security guides seized her before she could reach the door. She
struggled in their arms, but it was useless. They were too strong.

'The Doctor's in there,' she pleaded. 'He's at his limit. He couldn't take any
further ageing. It would kill him.'

'Good,' said Pangol. 'It will save him having to breathe the air of Argolis
when we eject him from the Hive.'

'Romana's protests were drowned by the voice of the Shuttle Launch
Controller through the loudspeaker system. He announced that the Foamasi
shuttle had taken off without permission.

'Destroy it,' ordered Pangol.
'But, sir, that is an act of war,' objected the Controller.
'Remember the Second Precept of Theron,' declared Pangol. ' "War is the

right and duty of every Argolin."
'Destroy the shuttle!'
As the suns rose - twin brilliant yellow objects - the whole sky was suddenly

illumined by a burst of blinding white light. The sound of the explosion, though
muffled by the glass of the dome, followed a moment later.

'Thus die the enemies of Argolis!' cried Pangol.
He settled the Helmet of Theron on his head and walked to the generator.

He flung open the door and entered.
Romana struggled free from the Security guides. The Doctor was in the

generator. Old and failing, he would stand no chance against the younger man.
She flung herself at the door. But she was too late. The door closed in her face.

'Help me!' she called.
But no one moved.
She realized that they were staring up at the bubble screen.
In the bubble above the generator the helmeted image of Pangol appeared.

The image grew larger. It swelled. Then, like cells dividing, the image separated
into three. Three Pangols appeared where a second before there had been only
one. These images in their turn separated, each producing three perfect
duplicates. The process was repeated over and over again. Serried ranks of
Pangols formed in the bubble. The doors of the generator opened at last. The
ranks of Pangols began to march out-all helmeted, all identical.

Romana stood appalled. She had a vision of what the New Argolis would
be like. It would be an army consisting of millions upon millions of facsimiles,
all obedient to one leader, all totally loyal to their one progenitor. It would be
an army of Pangols. The older Argolin were dying out. Soon all that would be
left would be a state populated by one man, multiplied a billion times. With
the generator to reduplicate him endlessly, what was.there to prevent him from
fighting any war, regardless of losses?What was to prevent him from conquering
other planets and populating them with himself? What was there to prevent
Pangol from conquering the whole galaxy?

Jostled, forced backwards by the tide of helmeted figures, Romana tried to
fight her way towards the generator.

'Remove this alien trash,' ordered the only begettor of the New Argolis. 'Let
her breathe the air of Argolis'



A number of helmeted figures seized her. Gloved hands muffled her
screams. Struggling violently, she was lifted off her feet and carried towards the
shuttle bay. She knew she would die on the surface of the planet.

Meanwhile the generator continued its sinister work. The sound of tramping
feet filled the Great Recreation Hall.

Hardin had found Mena in the boardroom, where she had collapsed. She
was alone, having been deserted by all her Medical Guides who had joined
Pangol. Her condition was grave. She was scarcely breathing at all, and when he
took her pulse it was so weak he feared her heart had stopped beating.

He rolled up his jacket to make a pillow for her head. As he did so, he heard
Pangol's voice come over the video screen: 'After you have disposed of the girl,
get the body of the Chairwoman. That, too, must be left outside on the surface
of the planet. We want no trace of past Heresiarchs here.'

They will not get Mena, thought Hardin. I'll see to that. She has perhaps
one chance and one chance only...

He picked up the dying woman in his arms.
It was hopeless Romana knew. Struggle as she might, the helmeted figures

were too strong for her. Then suddenly, as soon as they had carried her out of
the Great Hall, she found herself being lowered to her feet. They let go of her.

Puzzled, she looked round the group of helmeted Pangols.
'What's going on?' she demanded.
One of the figures put his finger to his lips, signalling her to remain silent.

He pushed back his helmet.
'Doctor!' she gasped.
For it was indeed the Doctor. No longer bent and white-haired, but youthful

and rejuvenated. A mere seven hundred years old.
'Ssh,' said the Doctor.
Perhaps the effort of speaking proved too much for him-because he

suddenly vanished into thin air! One minute he was grinning cheerfully at her
from underneath his helmet, the next minute he was gone: disappeared.

The phenomenon, however, was not unique. In the Great Hall other
members of Pangol's army were showing a distressing lack of substantiality.
They tended to vanish quite suddenly, like snowflakes on a hotplate. Therewould
be a squad of a hundred or so marching across the Hall. Then in the blink of an
eye they would be reduced to ninety. A few steps later, fifty. Before they had
gone twenty yards there would not be one left.

Another of the Argolin army removed his helmet to reveal a smiling Doctor.
'What's happening?' asked Romana.
The Doctor said: 'It's quite simple really. Tachyon images. Outwardly

Pangol—'
Another soldier raised his helmet. It was a second Doctor.
'—inwardly me,' explained Doctor Number Two.
'Unfortunately,' observed a third Doctor, 'these tachyon images are basically

unstable—'
But he, too, vanished before he could complete his sentence.
'Or fortunately,' remarked Doctor Number Two, 'depending on your point

of view.'
And like the Cheshire Cat, he was gone.



'Doctor, which is you?' asked Romana.
'Here,' replied another of the soldiers. He took her arm. 'Come on. Back to

the generator. We've got work to do.'
'Thank heavens,' she said. 'I was getting worried. At least you're solid.'
At which point the hand on her arm, and indeed the rest of the body attached

to the hand, abruptly evaporated. Four, five, six other Doctors vanished one after
another. In desperation Romana grabbed the last figure and clung to it.

'Careful,' protested the Doctor. 'I may be fragile.'
'Do you feel fragile?'
'I've got a bit of a headache and my feet hurt,' he complained. 'All in all,

I have felt better.'
'But are you real?'
The Doctor poked himself in the chest with a cautious finger, an exercise

which apparently did not fill him with confidence. 'Real-ish,' he ventured at last.
'That is to say, I seem to be all here. More or less. Give or take the odd molecule
or two.

'I'd give me another moment or two, if I were you,' he advised. 'Maybe I
need to set-like a jelly.'

Romana let go of him.
He did not vanish.
'Seems to be holding out,' he said at last. 'Wait a minute-I've lost my coat!'
'No time to bother about coats,' snapped Romana. 'We've got to do

something for Mena.'
The Argolin guides watched their new leader in total silence. They were in

a state of shock. Not surprisingly they were baffled by the turn of events. Within
the space of only a few mintues they had witnessed the creation, and destruction,
of a whole army-an act of military vandalism beyond the powers of even the
most insane of Argolin generals.

Pangol had removed his helmet and stood at the data station console. He
was running,a checkout routine designed to test the computer programme. If
necessary, he would patch the programme, thus overriding that part of it which
had caused the trouble.

He refused to be disheartened by what he regarded as a mere hiccup, a
minor technical hitch. The destruction of one army of doubles would not stop
him. Once he had amended the programme and run a few tests, he would reset
the controls of the generator. The rebirth of Argolis would begin again. A short
delay was not important.

A figure pushed its way through the silent crowd of (real) Argolin. It was
Hardin, carrying Mena in his arms. Ignoring Pangol he made his way to the
generator.

It took the latter a moment before he realized what the Terran had in mind.
'Stop him!' he cried. 'The late Heresiarch is dead. That man must not be

allowed to enter the generator with her dead body.'
Perhaps it was the shock of seeing Mena again, or perhaps it was at that

moment that the old Argolin belief in absolute obedience to a leader died - at
any rate no one moved to do Pangol's bidding. No one barred Hardin's way.

'I am in command!' shrilled Pangol.



'Mena's. stopped breathing,' said the Terran simply. 'The generator is her
only hope.'

'I am leader here! I order you to go back!'
Hardin shouldered Pangol aside. This sudden assault on his person

galvanized the latter. All his resentment and disappointment came boiling to the
surface. In a frenzy he flung himself on the Terran, whose armswere encumbered
with the unconscious woman.

Almost with indifference the other Argolin watched as the two men
wrestled at the door of the generator, each holding tight to the body of Mena.
Then a fierce blow from Pangol sent Hardin sprawling to the floor. Triumphantly
the young Argolin turned to face his people, withMena in his arms. But the effort
was too much for him. He lost his balance, staggered, and took a step backwards.
He stepped over the threshold of the generator.

With a soft sigh the door closed automatically.
Pangol and Mena were trapped inside the generator.
Lights on the computer console flickered. Its programme was set in

operation. There was a faint whine as power surged into the generator.
When the Doctor and Romana entered the Great Recreation Hall a moment

later, they found Hardin struggling desperately to force open the door of the
generator. Silent and unmoving the Argolin looked on.

'Look!' cried Romana. She pointed to the bubble screen.
There in the bubble they could see the images of Mena and Pangol. But the

two images did not divide and reduplicate as they had done before. Instead they
seemed to blend into each other.

'I set it up for rejuvenation, I think,' said the Doctor. 'But heaven knows
what effect it will have.'

Romana shook her head, 'Anything could happen. The whole machine must
have become totally unstable by now.'

Together they pulled on the doors of the generator with Hardin. But it was
useless. Nothing would open them.

'The doors won't open while it's still running,' he gasped.
'Are you sure?' she said.
She went over to the data station console and started to try and abort the

programme. But it was too late. When Pangol had reprogrammed the computer,
he had written out the over-ride, which would have enabled anyone to stop or
change the routine while it was running.

The Doctor picked up the Helmet of Theron which lay on the floor where
it had fallen. He weighed it in his hand. The Helmet was heavy and made of a
metal hard enough to stop a missile from a bolt gun or blunt the edge of one of
the great double-handed sabres used by the old Argolin in their frequent duels.

Adopting the stance of an Olympic shot-putter, the Doctor hurled the
Helmet at the bubble screen.

There was a flash of light as the screen shattered into a thousand fragments.
For a moment everyone was blinded. Then when sight returned, the Doctor saw
the door of the generator slide open. A figure appeared in the doorway.

It was Mena.
But a younger Mena, slim and statuesque. She carried something in her

arms.



A small baby, bawling like a wild thing.
Mena spoke: 'I think this child must be Pangol. I seem to recall that he

looked very much like this when he was born.'
'Apparently the generator looks after its own,' observed Hardin.
The Doctor laughed. 'One thing about babies,' he said, 'is that they're pretty

harmless. They can't cause wars or lead armies for a good twenty years.'
'Then the Argolin must bring up this one to be a man of peace.'
She handed the child to the Doctor to hold. He looked down at the angry,

red, little creature with some alarm.Maybe I waswrong about babies, he thought.
This one looks quite capable of anything. .

But Mena had other things on her mind. 'First,' she said, 'we must contact
the Foamasi and avert a war. Somehowwemust make amends for the destruction
of their shuttle.'

'Not necessary, madam, I assure you,' declared the familiar voice of Brock.
The Foamasi agent stalked through the crowd, his lizard's tail swishing in

what appeared to be a friendly manner.
'But I thought your shuttle—'
'One of my agents', replied the Foamasi, 'permitted the leader of the West

Lodge, the creature who impersonated your accountant, to escape. Whether my
man was merely inefficient or else in the pay of the criminal is something that
only a full internal investigation by the Bureau will determined

'In any case,' he continued, 'the question is academic. They took off together
in our shuttle, which your Controller subsequently blew up. My congratulations.
We are therefore in your debt.'

Mena wondered if she could capitalize on this indebtedness. After all one
good turn deserves another. She knew that financing a new rejuvenation
generator would require more capital than the Argolin possessed. She was
already mentally planning the new publicity campaign: Come To Argolis And
Grow Young.

While Mena and the Foamasi exchanged diplomatic compliments, the
Doctor handed Hardin the baby.

'Here,' he said. 'Hold this.'
Romana was peering cautiously inside the door of the generator. 'We must

get the Randomizer back,' she declared.
'Perhaps after we've run a checkout routine to see howmuch of the computer

is still operational, it will be safe to go inside.'
But the Doctor had had enough of Randomizers to last him for a very long

time. 'Why bother?' he said.
'We can't leave the Randomizer here.'
'Why not?'
'We'll never know where the TARD1S is going to turn up next.'
'Good,' replied the Doctor. 'Neither will the Black Guardian.'
'Apart from Randomizers, he went on, I am getting sick and tired of

bogeymen with ideas above their station. The cosmos is full of them.'
He walked over to the TARD1S and opened the door.
'There's been more than enough randomizing on this job.'
This was supposed to be a holiday, snapped Romana.



K9 still stood on the bench where they had left him. He was surrounded by
a pool of seawater. 'Hello, K9,' said the Doctor. 'Pleased to see us?'

There was a strange whirring noise in the Great Recreation Hall. The
Argolin looked round. They showed no particular surprise when the blue police
box dematerialized. It had after all been one of those days.

Revision Notes:
Initial Scan by ST7

Ver 1.0: Converted to html and proofread by ST7



Table of Contents
1. Brighton
2. Argolis
3. Brock
4. The Generator
5. Intruders
6. Hardin
7. Mirror, Mirror, on the Wall
8. The Foamasi
9. Rebirth