DOCTORWHO
AND THE ARK IN SPACE

By IAN MARTER

Based on the BBC television serial 'The Ark in Space' by Robert Holmes
by arrangement with the British Broadcasting Corporation.



Prologue The Intruder

Out among the remotest planets, in faithful orbit through the Solar System,
the great Satellite revolved slowly in the glimmer of a billion distant suns,
reflecting their faint light from its cold and silent surfaces. All within remained
utterly quiet and still, but primed and ready: ready for the eventual moment of
awakening. Deep in its innermost structure an atomic clock oscillated, waiting
for the moment when it would cause a tiny electric current to flow, activating
circuits which branched throughout the vast Satellite, bringing it to life once
more out in the wilderness of Space.

Patiently it waited. Then suddenly, after many centuries, something stirred
within it: something alien, that was not part of its intricate programming. Panels
began to slide smoothly open. Faintest shadows ran over the gleaming walls. The
deserted tunnels and chambers, forming the 'rim', the 'spokes' and the 'hub' of
the enormous wheel, which was the Satellite, began to echo with rustles, hoarse
squeaks and whistlings. Cautiously feeling its way into one of the spherical
control chambers—positioned like gigantic pods along the 'spoke' sections—
there crawled an intruder. It dragged its massive leathery body along on angular
tentacle-legs, which bristled with sharp hairs and scratched shrilly against the
metallic walls. Swinging its domed head slowly from side to side, it pierced the
half-light with giant, globular eyes. At the end of its long, scorpion tail there
glinted a menacing claw which clattered in the creature's wake.

As soon as it entered the control chamber, the alien intruder eagerly scanned
the mass of inert instruments which covered the walls, like exhibits in an
abandoned museum. From the domed ceiling there descended a shining metallic
sphere. For an instant the creature was reflected in its mirror-like surface;
information was flashed to a central computer bank, analysed, and a command
relayed back to the sphere. It glowed brilliantly for a second. The startled intruder
stared defiantly upwards, and at the same instant a fierce burst of energy sent it
clattering against a control console, its tentacles contracting in agony.

For a few seconds all was still. Then the creature moved. Again the sphere
glowed, and with a sharp crack hurled it back across the chamber in a blazing
electrical discharge. The creature cowered, uttering hoarse screams as a stream
of brutal shock-waves pulsed from the sphere, blistering its body with burns.
Staring at the clusters of delicate instruments, its huge eyes useless in the fierce
light, the creature began to flail at the wall panels as if searching desperately
for something. All at once, a section of the panelling slid open. Fighting the
searing bursts of radiation from the sphere, the creature dragged itself through
the opening into a second, similar chamber. Out of range of the sphere, but now
blinded and almost paralysed, the intruder fumbled among the control consoles
lining the chamber until it somehow located the section it sought.

With frantic, crippled, movements it ripped open the instrument panel and
pulled out a thick bundle of multi-coloured cables. Then, arching its segmented
tail up over its head, it gripped the cables in its huge claw and severed them



cleanly with a single slice. At that moment, all through the electronic nerve
centres of the Satellite, certain vital systems were closed down.

With an unearthly sigh of satisfaction the creature turned away, and in
complete darkness now, crawled back through the first chamber and out into the
labyrinth of tunnels and chambers. Its mission was almost completed; one final
task remained. Slowly and painfully, but with deadly purpose, it made its way
towards the sleeping humans. The brittle, splintering sound of its movements
died away as panel after panel glided shut behind it. The sphere hung inert in
the darkness.

When at last the atomic clock signalled the beginning of the great
Awakening, no current flowed. The circuits remained dead, the systems did not
activate. The Satellite continued its eternal orbit, the Solar Energy Reservoirs
absorbing and storing energy from the sun—though no longer for any purpose.

Then there came a second invasion...



1 The Second Invasion

'Clumsy, ham-fisted idiot,' cried the Doctor, striding out of the TARDIS
into pitch darkness.

'I'm terribly sorry, Doctor. I was only trying to... trying to open the door...'
stammered Harry Sullivan, just catching the door as it swung back in his face.

'Come out of there at once, and don't touch anything else,' called the Doctor,
pausing for a moment in the light streaming through the door of the TARDIS
and staring about him.

The Doctor was a tall, broad man with a riot of curly brown hair bubbling
out from beneath a stylish felt hat. His generous face was animated with intense
curiosity as his enormous eyes peered into the semi-darkness. His hands were
thrust deep into the bulging pockets of a voluminous red velvet jacket, and the
trailing ends of a long multi-coloured woollen scarf flapped around his legs as
he moved cautiously away from the TARDIS.

Surgeon Lieutenant Harry Sullivan RN stood uncertainly in the doorway,
fiddling nervously with his cravat. He was an athletic young man in his late
twenties, with a straight back and a square jaw. He wore a rowing club blazer
and sharply pressed slacks.

'Oh I say,' he exclaimed, 'we've gone.'
'Who's gone; Harry?' asked a bright, laughing voice behind him.
He turned to face the mischievous smile of Sarah Jane Smith, who was

watching his confusion with evident delight. Sarah was a slim, level-headed
journalist, about the same age as Harry, her trim figure clad in a trendy denim
trouser-suit, her short dark hair tucked into a saucy woollen hat.

'Well, I mean this isn't... we aren't where we were when we...' began Harry,
venturing a step or two into the gloom. A few minutes earlier, when he had
entered the old, battered blue Police Telephone Box, at the Doctor's invitation
to have a quick look round, it had been standing in a corner of the Laboratory
at UNIT Headquarters, in broad daylight. 'I think I've gone mad,' he muttered
at last.

Sarah Jane touched his arm sympathetically. 'I know what you mean,' she
said. 'That's exactly how I felt after my first trip. You'll find it takes quite a bit
of getting used to.'

The door of the TARDIS swung slowly shut behind them. In the pitch
darkness they could hear the Doctor moving stealthily about..

'Where are we, Doctor?' called Sarah casually. A powerful torch beam
snapped on and swept round.

'Do you know, Sarah, I have no idea,' replied the Doctor after a pause. Sarah
knew precisely what that little pause meant She felt her way cautiously over
to the Doctor's side. The roving torchlight revealed a large spherical chamber,
its walls entirely covered in instruments, with several flat control consoles, like
circular tables, grouped around it.



'Just a little trip to the Caucasus, or perhaps once round the Moon'—Sarah
imitated the Doctor in one of his off-hand moods—'just to prove to Harry that
the old Police Box really could travel in...'

'I didn't expect him to start fiddling with the Helmic Orientators, Sarah,'
interrupted the Doctor sharply. He broke off as the chamber was dimly
illuminated again. Harry had opened the door of the TARDIS and was staring
into it open-mouthed.

'It's bigger than a Cathedral... on the inside...' he gasped in amazement. The
Doctor strode over and locked the door. Still in a state of shock, Harry mumbled
away in the darkness, 'You know you could make a fortune out of this thing,
Doctor...' But the Doctor was already pacing about the chamber, sweeping the
torch beam over the curved reflecting walls and closely examining the dense
clusters of instruments.

Grotesque shadows flapped around them. Sarah shivered. It was bitterly
cold, and the air suddenly seemed terribly thin. It was quite an effort to breathe.
Something loomed up against her. She jumped. It was Harry.

'Sorry, Miss Smith,' he mumbled, loosening his cravat, 'but I'm a bit
disorientated...'

'Not much oxygen,' remarked the Doctor from the shadows. 'Still,' he added
cheerfully, 'nothing to worry about.'

Sarah turned to Harry. 'So suffocation is nothing to worry about,' she
whispered sarcastically.

'Oh, we can survive for quite a time yet,' boomed the Doctor, suddenly right
beside them. He was concentrating on spinning a yoyo effortlessly up and down
its string in the torchlight.

Harry decided it was time to speak up. 'Well, I've got quite a few patients to
see at four o'clock,;' he tried to affect a casual air, 'so if you don't mind, Doctor,
I'd like to be getting...'

'A simple gravity reading, Harry,' grinned the Doctor, putting away the
yoyo. 'It would appear that we are inside some kind of artificial satellite. Now
isn't that fascinating .'

'Doctor, it's dark, it's cold and it's getting very airless,' Sarah protested
loudly. But the Doctor had left them again, and was busily examining a section
of wall panelling away on the far side of the chamber. He seemed quite oblivious
of their discomfort.

Suddenly they were bathed in a harsh, unwelcoming white light.
'There we are,' cried the Doctor, turning. away from the control panel and

surveying the scene with childlike delight, taking in every detail of their
surroundings. He seized the ends of his long scarf and spun them like propellers.
'Fascinating,' he murmured, 'fascinating.' In his resonant voice,. excitement,
understanding and wonder were mingled as he crept respectfully round the
chamber. For a moment, his companions' discomfort gave way to amazement.

'What's it all for?' gasped Harry. He shielded his eyes from the glare and
peered at the coded switches, dials, lights and buttons covering the circular wall.
Despite his anxiety to return to UNIT Headquarters where he was Chief Medical
Officer, he yielded to an unfortunate curiosity that had already got him into
trouble in the TARDIS. He tinkered with one or two micro-switches on a nearby
console.



At the same moment, an invisible panel in the wall slid open directly in
front of Sarah.

'Doctor,' she cried, 'look at this.' But the Doctor was deeply engrossed in
examining the bright metallic sphere which was suspended from the centre of
the domed ceiling.

'Of terrestrial design certainly,' he muttered, 'but I can't quite place the
period.'

'Well, none of it seems to be working now,' gasped Harry, leaning weakly
against the control console in an effort to ease the increasing pain in his chest.

Sarah looked round at her two heedless companions. She knew that once the
Doctor became involved in something, it was quite impossible to distract him.
Besides, she had a habit of striking out on her own in search of a good front-page
story. She shrugged at their indifference, and suddenly oblivious of how difficult
it was becoming to breathe, stepped lightly through the opening in front of her.

She found herself in a similar, slightly smaller chamber, which was
dominated by a low, couch-like construction supported on a single slender pillar
in the centre of the floor. She recognised the stream-lined cabinets and tape-reels
of computer memory banks set into the walls. The upper part of the circular wall
was patterned with blank video screens and systems display panels. Sarah leaned
against the couch, her head spinning and her heart pounding. Her eyes tried to
focus on a section of instrument panelling that had been ripped open, spilling
out a cluster of cable ends. She suddenly found herself fighting for breath. The
voices of the Doctor and Harry in the other chamber gradually receded into the
distance...

'... and judging by thatmodified version of the Bennet Oscillator,' theDoctor
was saying, 'I would estimate that all this was put together in the Thirtieth
Century.'

'Oh no,' gasped Harry. 'The Thirtieth what ?'
'You don't agree?' Sarah heard the Doctor inquire indignantly. Harry

muttered something incoherently. Then the Doctor's voice boomed confidently,
'Oh yes, the late Twenty-ninth or early Thirtieth I feel sure. For example, Harry,
just look at this...'

Sarah suddenly heard the panel glide shut behind her. She whirled round.
There was no trace of it; she was confronted with a wall of blank instruments.
Sarah stumbled over, her heart. thumping like a steam engine, and searched for
the edges of the panel.

'There must be a manual control,' she panted. She gulped for air, scarcely
able to fill her lungs. In sudden panic, she pounded and kicked the panelling.
'Doctor... please... I can't breathe... there's no air in here.' She felt herself gripped,
as if in a huge vice. Her ears were ringing and her limbs were numbed.
Desperately she clawed at the wall. 'Doctor... Harry... please help me... pl...'
Sarah sank to the cold floor.

Harry was leaning against a corner of the TARDIS; despite the cold he
was beginning to sweat with the effort of breathing. 'Look, Doctor... I'm a
straightforward sort of chap,' he gasped, 'are you telling me that we're now in the
middle of the Thirtieth Century?'

The Doctor seemed totally unaffected by the coldness and the lack of
oxygen. 'Gracious me, no, Harry,' he replied. 'Well beyond that.'



'But... where... Where are we?' pleaded Harry, not sure whether he was
dreaming or going insane. The Doctor was kneeling down and listening intently
to the floor through an ancient brass ear trumpet.

'Difficult to say,' he murmured, sitting back on his heels and taking a large
bag of jelly-babies from his pocket. 'All this is obviously quite old,' the Doctor
popped a sweet into his mouth, 'several thousand years at least.' He chewed away
thoughtfully.

Suddenly he leaped to his feet. 'Where's Sarah?' he demanded, advancing
on Harry who stared back at him, dumbfounded.

'Perhaps she went back into the TARDIS,' said Harry.
'Impossible,' snapped the Doctor. 'I have the key.' He strode about the

chamber, peering closely at the walls through a huge magnifying glass. 'I have
told her time and time again about wandering off by herself,' he said grimly.

'Well... there... there must be a door... somewhere,' panted Harry, his head
whirling.

The Doctor stopped in his tracks and fixed him with a piercing stare.
'Not necessarily.'
Harry glanced longingly at the TARDIS; strange and incomprehensible

though it was, it suddenly seemed very familiar and safe.
'You haven't touched anything again, have you, Harry?' the Doctor

demanded accusingly.
Harry quailed. He was feeling decidedly unwell in the airless conditions.

'No I... well, yes I... I think I did just press something...'
'Show me,' commanded the Doctor.
'... but absolutely nothing happened,' protested Harry. He could barely stand

upright now.
'Show me exactly what you did, Harry,' coaxed the Doctor gently.
Harry tottered over to the control console and stared down at the maze of

instruments. Switches, dials and buttons danced about before his eyes in the
unrelenting white glare. He struggled to remember. The Doctor's voice seemed
to reach him from the other end of a long long corridor full of slamming doors.

'Just try to remember, Harry.' Harry's hand wavered uncertainly; in
desperation he pressed a switch.

Immediately, the panel slid open. Sarah lay just inside the smaller chamber
in a crumpled heap. At once Harry recognised the bluish pallor around her lips.
'She's cyanosed,' he whispered. 'There's even less air in there. We must get her
out.'

As they bent down to lift Sarah, the panel glided shut automatically,
trapping them all together. The Doctor searched feverishly for the panel control
circuitry. Harry, now almost completely overcome, sank down against the wall
and feebly tried to prop Sarah into a sitting position.

'All my... m... my fault... sorry...' panted Harry.
The Doctor had discovered the damaged panelling and the cluster of cable

ends. He set to work with magnifier and sonic screwdriver. 'No, no, Harry, I got
us into this,' he muttered, deftly sorting through the broken connections.

His movements grew rapidly heavier and clumsier as the lack of oxygen
finally began to take effect. 'This... this is quite extraordinary, Harry,' he panted.
'Gyroscopic Field Governor Circuit... Temperature Stabiliser... Ah... Oxygen



Valves Servo Backup Circuits...' Several times the Doctor dropped the sonic
screwdriver and the magnifying glass. Once or twice he glanced anxiously at
Sarah and Harry. They were both unconscious. Sweat ran into his eyes. His two
hearts laboured. His hands felt like rubber. He forced his mind to concentrate on
the delicate operation of sonic-soldering the tiny, complex connections. He kept
thinking of the faithful TARDIS waiting on the other side of the vacuum panel,
ready to take them all to safety—or to anywhere...

At last, after what seemed an eternity, valves openedwith a precise clicking.
There was a gentle hiss of oxygen all round the chamber. Soon Harry's eyes
opened. He struggled into a sitting position.

'Only just in time, Harry,' whispered the Doctor hoarsely from across the
chamber. 'Are you feeling better?'

'Convalescent,' replied Harry, managing a grin. 'All I need now is a couple
of weeks in Blackpool.'

They laid the unconscious Sarah gently on the couch construction, and
Harry tried to revive her while the Doctor set about repairing the remaining
circuits.

'There's a mystery here, Harry,' he muttered, 'Something quite
extraordinary; these cables have been bitten through.'

'Bitten,' echoed Harry, all but letting Sarah tumble to the floor.
'Yes,' the Doctor continued quietly, 'and whatever was responsible clearly

possessed a reasoning intelligence.'
'And very large teeth,' added Harry wryly. Sarah's eyelids flickered and then

opened. 'Sarah's coming round,' he said, smiling with relief.
At that moment the panel leading to the other chamber slid smoothly aside.

The Doctor strode triumphantly through. 'Splendid,' he said. 'All systems go,
wouldn't you say?'

Harry checked Sarah's wavering pulse. 'Now take it easy, old girl,' he said
gently, as she caught at his sleeve in a momentary spasm of fear. 'You'll be right
as ninepence in a few...' The words froze on his lips as, from the other chamber,
there came a deafening crack. Harry ran across to the panel opening. The Doctor
was nowhere to be seen. Something bright caught his eye. Glancing upwards
he saw his own distorted reflection in the polished sphere suspended from the
ceiling. Before he could step forward he was seized by one ankle and dragged
to the floor. As he fell, something struck his other foot with the force of a
cannonball, tearing off his shoe. He lay quite still, half under one of the control
consoles. The acrid smell of burnt rubber filled the chamber. For a moment he
dared not open his eyes; one foot was completely numbed, and the other was still
held in an iron grip. He tried to twist himself round and sit upright. His head was
at once thrust roughly back to the floor.

'Keep down, Harry,' hissed the Doctor in his ear.
Sarah lay limp on the couch. She felt as if she had floated to the surface from

the bottom of a deep pool. There, in the fresh air, had been Harry's welcoming
smile, but all at once he had disappeared again and she was alone. She heard
the fierce cracking sounds and Harry's scream of terror. She struggled to get up,
but found herself forced down on to the couch by invisible hands. Everything
about her began to wobble and tiny electric shocks rippled suddenly through her



entire body. She tried to call out, but no sound would come. Very slowly, and
very gently, she was being pulled apart...

Outside, in the Main Control Chamber, Harry and the Doctor crouched
silently in the confined space beneath the instrument console.

'What happened?' croaked Harry at last, his throat parched with fear.
'Just don't move,' whispered the Doctor. He had balanced his hat on the end

of the telescopic probe he always carried, and was stealthily inching it up into
the air above the edge of the console. At once came the shattering whipcrack
from above them; the hat flew into the shadows beside the TARDIS and lay
smouldering. The Doctor stared at it in anguish. 'I'm afraid we're trapped again,
Harry,' he sighed.

'But what is it?' gasped Harry.
'That,' said the Doctor, casting his eyes upward, 'is an OMDSS.'
'A what?'
'An Organic Matter Detector Surveillance System,' answered the Doctor

patiently.
'A sort of electronic sentry,' suggested Harry, suddenly catching sight of

the shoe that had been blown off his numb foot; it lay curled up like a charred
kipper. He shuddered.

'Precisely,' said the Doctor. 'I must confess I was not expecting this—my
repairs next door were a little too thorough.'

At that moment Harry's mind cleared. He craned his head to look into the
adjacent chamber where they had just left Sarah, but he could not see the couch
construction.

'Sarah... keep away from the door,' he called. There was no reply. 'Sarah...
can you hear me... Sarah?' But the only sound from the other chamber was a faint
humming. Harry glanced worriedly at the Doctor, but he was totally absorbed in
jiggling the metal probe about in the air. Nothing happened.

'Just as I thought,' he muttered, 'the system only reacts to organic matter
in motion.'

'Well that hardly helps us,' said Harry. 'We're organic.'
'Not under here we're not,' grinned the Doctor mischievously; his voice

booming in the confined space. Harry watched blankly as the Doctor adjusted
the sonic screwdriver and directed it at the joint between the console support-
strut and the floor. The beam of ultra-high and ultra-low frequency waves soon
unsealed the sonic welds...

'... A little to the right... forward... steady now. One slip, Harry, and we'll
be charcoal.'

On hands and knees, sheltered by the heavy console which they carried like
a giant umbrella, the Doctor and Harry inched their way across to the opposite
side of the chamber. The silence from the other chamber was ominous: what if
Sarah had blacked out again? Or worse, what if she suddenly came stumbling
through the opening, unaware of the glittering electronic 'watchdog' in the domed
ceiling?

Gradually they progressed round the chamber, the console swaying
precariously in their combined grip. Even when they paused for a moment's rest,
they had to support the top-heavy 'parasol' by its single centre leg. Raw-kneed



and breathless with effort, Harry decided that if this really was the Thirtieth
Century, then it was an awfully long way to go just to play the fool.

At last, the Doctor called a halt. 'There it is, but it's well beyond reach,' he
said, craning upward. Harry was beginning to resent always being several moves
behind.

' What is?' he asked, exasperated.
'The Surveillance System Cutout, of course,' replied the Doctor, deftly

fashioning his scarf into a lasso. He flung the loop up at the switches. There was
the now familiar flash and crack, and the scarf fluttered down in two blazing
pieces.

'Bad luck. Good try though,' whispered Harry admiringly.
'This is not a game of cricket,' snapped the Doctor.
'Sorry,' whispered Harry, chastened. 'Mind you, if I had a ball I could jolly

soon reach that switch.' The Doctor silently produced a worn cricket ball from
one of his many pockets. Swallowing his amazement, Harry took it. He polished
it on his lapel. His moment had come at last.

The ball, with a good off-spin to it, had scarcely left his hand than it
exploded into a shower of carbon fragments. 'Organic, of course,' he muttered,
crest-fallen.

The Doctor leaned forward, slipped off Harry's remaining shoe, and handed
it to him. 'You don't need this any more, do you, Harry?' he said significantly.
Harry was becoming more and more convinced that he was in the company of
a madman, with no hope of rescuing Sarah or of ever getting back to reality.
He opened his mouth to speak. 'No. Good,' interrupted the Doctor. 'Now listen
carefully,' and he quickly outlined a simple plan...

... A few moments later, at a prearranged signal from the Doctor, Harry
flung his shoe high over the console under which they were still hiding. At the
same instant, the Doctor leapt up at the switch; there was a rapid series of cracks,
a smell of burning rubber, and then silence.

After a long pause, the Doctor's head appeared slowly over the top of the
control desk, followed, after another long pause, byHarry's. Cautiously they both
stood up. 'That foxed you,' said the Doctor pulling a face at himself in the mirror
surface of the OMDSS. He wandered over to retrieve the remains of his hat and
his scarf, calling brightly, 'It's all right now, Sarah, you can come out.'

Harry picked up his two melted shoes. 'The Brigadier will never believe a
word of this,' he thought.

Suddenly the Doctor's voice sounded urgently from the other chamber.
'Sarah... Sarah, where are you... ?'

With a shoe in each hand, Harry padded over to the opening. The Doctor
was standing alone beside the couch. All around, the chamber lights were
beginning to flash on the instrument panels, and a multitude of quiet humming
sounds enveloped them. The chamber seemed almost to be coming alive. The
Doctor turned to Harry, his face filled with anxiety.

'Sarah's not here,' he said.



2 Sarah Vanishes

Sarah tried to scream, but the only sound she heard was a distant murmuring
which grew gradually louder and more distinct. It was repeating over and over
again a hypnotic refrain. 'Welcome, Sister, welcome to Terra Nova... Welcome,
Sister, welcome to Terra Nova...'

Finding herself suddenly free of the invisible hands that had seemed to tear
at her body, Sarah struggled feebly to sit up. At once the mysterious voice spoke
firmly but gently. 'No, Sister, do not move. Do not attempt to leave the
Tranquiller. Remain in contact with the Biocryonic vibrations.' Too weak to
disobey, Sarah lay back and stared listlessly about her. She was too exhausted
even to be afraid.

All she could remember was a terrifying sense of suffocation, then a brief
moment of relief with the Doctor and Harry bending over her, followed by the
sounds of a violent struggle and Harry's cry of distress, and finally the sensation
of being slowly dismembered. The couch on which she was lying seemed
familiar, but she did not remember it being encased in the translucent, glass-like
canopy which now confined her. As she stared at it, the surface of the curved
shield appeared to be in constant motion, just like the surface of a soap bubble.
The harder she stared, so the patterns changed until they began to resemble huge,
eerie shadows cast by something moving about on the other side of the glass.

The soothing voice began again, scarcely audible, and for a moment Sarah
imagined that she could hear the Doctor and Harry talking, and that it was their
shadows playing over the canopy. She tried to call out to them, but still she could
make no sound. Panic-stricken, she attempted to hammer on the glass to attract
attention, but found she could not raise her arms from the couch. Shewas trapped.

As before, the strange voice grewmore distinct. It had a slightly mechanical
tone, and echoed around her as if she were inside a vast cathedral. 'Sister, the
principal phase of your Biocryogenic Processing is about to commence...'...
Cryogenic... cryogenic... the word reverberated in Sarah's mind. She tried to
remember; what was it? Something to do with freezing... yes, freezing... the
theory of tissue preservation for long periods of time... from the Greek word
for frost... She fought hard to keep hold of her train of thought, but the trance-
like voice went inexorably on—'... If you have any message that you wish to be
conveyed to the members of your Community, you may record it at the end of
this announcement. Please preface your message with your Personal and your
Community Identification Codes...'

During the pause which followed, the space around Sarah began to fill with
a white vapour that chilled her body. As it grew thicker and thicker, she felt her
skin tightening and growing numb. The more she gasped with the coldness, the
more the freezing vapour pierced her lungs. As it filled the capsule in which
she was trapped, it seemed to solidify into a gelatinous mass; Sarah lay like a
fish imprisoned in ice. She felt her blood running literally cold, her veins and
arteries contracted around the chilling fluid as it coursed through her. She felt her
heartbeat slowing and labouring. Her body appeared to merge into the cold jelly



surrounding her. Shattering ripples burst through her as the substance began to
vibrate at an ever increasing frequency. Within a few minutes, Sarah had lost all
sense of her physical reality. She was aware only of her failing consciousness,
and of the sound of a new voice, the quiet, authoritative voice of an elderly
woman.

'Greetings, Sister Volunteer. On behalf of the World Executive, I, the High
Minister, salute you who are about to make the supreme sacrifice. In a moment
youwill pass beyond life. Lest there should remain any doubt in yourmind or fear
in your heart, remember; you take with you not only your own, but all our pasts.
We, who remain to perish here, will live again in you. You are our only future...
our only hope...' The voice finally faded into silence, and with it, Sarah lost
consciousness. After a while, the white substance thinned and finally vapourised
and disappeared. When it cleared, the couch was empty.

'Harry, I am an idiot.' The Doctor and Harry were bending anxiously over
the couch on which, five minutes earlier, they had placed the semi-conscious
Sarah. While they had been fighting their duel with the OMDSS in the other
chamber, Sarah had apparently disappeared into thin air. Having satisfied
himself that there were no more concealed panels through which she could have
gone, the Doctor had removed a part of the upholstered section of the couch,
and exposed a honeycomb of small cells, each about the size and shape of the
reflector in a bicycle lamp. The cells were interconnected with fine coppery
wiring embedded in a perspex frame.

Harry was relieved that, just for once, he was not to blame for what had
happened.

'Fortunately it's only an internal relay,' said the Doctor, glancing up at one
of the instrument displays set into the circular wall.

'A what?' Harry looked from the couch to the instrument panel and back
to the Doctor.

'A short-range Matter Transmitter,' snapped the Doctor, striding back into
the main chamber. Harry padded after him, still clutching the remains of his
shoes.

'What on earth does that mean?'
'It means,' called the Doctor, stepping through another panel in the main

chamber which opened automatically as he approached it, 'that Sarah can't be
very far away. Do come along, Harry.'

Slithering on the smooth metal flooring, Harry followed. As he entered the
long tunnel-like passage leading from the chamber, he was amazed to see that the
Doctor had already reached the other end and was waiting impatiently for him.
All at once, Harry's feet were swept from under him, and he found himself sitting
on a moving track running down the centre of the tunnel. It carried him smoothly
with a faint hum to the far end. Just as he scrambled to his feet, convinced that he
was about to crash headlong into the bulkhead at the end of the tunnel, the track
slowed and stopped. Harry had no time to express his astonishment; the Doctor
was already disappearing through a panel he had opened in the bulkhead wall.

They found themselves at a 'T' junction, where the tunnel joined at right
angles with a spacious gallery which curved away out of sight in both directions.
The Doctor motioned Harry to stay where he was, then advanced cautiously into
the middle of the intersection. All the surfaces of the gallery were made of the



same highly reflective metal, and a harsh white light flooded everywhere from a
concealed source. Along the outer wall of the gallery, at intervals of a fewmetres,
were set large ovoid window panels of tinted glass, through which a brilliantly
clear night sky blazed. It was clearer than Harry had ever seen it before.

'I say,' he breathed. 'It's beautiful...' The words faded from his lips as he
realised with a start that the billions of stars were moving slowly but
unmistakably across the panels. He felt momentarily unsteady, as if a ship's deck
were heaving beneath his feet. 'We're... we're moving ,' he said, his eyes wide.

'This is no time for star-gazing, Harry,' called the Doctor, setting off briskly
to the left. When Harry finally tore his eyes away from the splendid panorama
through the observation panels, the Doctor had already disappeared round the
curve.

'This must be the size of a running track,' panted Harry, as he hurried to
catch up.

'Naturally.' The Doctor grinned over his shoulder. 'We are now in the
Cincture Structure.'

'The what?' Harry skidded in his stockinged feet.
'The outer wheel,' called the Doctor. 'We appear to be inside an old

Centrifugal Gravity Satellite, shaped rather like a doughnut with an éclair stuck
through the middle and connected to it by several chocolate fingers.'

Harry rather resented the Doctor's oversimplified explanation. 'I suppose
we are now walking round inside a doughnut,' he remarked. But his sarcasm was
lost on the Doctor.

'Exactly,' he said. 'Of course it has been converted to a more sophisticated
Electrostatic Field Gravity System, but it still revolves on its axis because there's
simply nothing to stop it.'

They were approaching another bulkhead. In the centre of its sealed panel
there was a stencilled notice in green and maroon striped computer lettering:

FIRST TECHNOP PERSONNEL ONLY
MEDTECH
Just before they reached it, the Doctor darted suddenly through yet another

automatic panel which opened silently in the inner side wall. He re-emerged
immediately, much to Harry's relief. 'Well, Sarah's not in there ,' he said, striding
on towards the bulkhead barring their way. All at once a disembodied metallic
voice barked at them: 'STERILE AREA'.

The Doctor paused in his tracks, and Harry leaped backwards as if he had
trodden on a nail. All these hidden, automatic panels, electronic guards, hidden
voices and moving floors made him feel as if he were trapped in a crazy maze at
a funfair. However the Doctor seemed perfectly at home; he had rested his head
against a small copper plate at the side of the bulkhead panel, and seemed to be
meditating. After a few seconds the panel opened.

'How did you do that?' exclaimed Harry.
'Alpha waves and things,' the Doctor tapped his head. 'It's surprising what

one can do with a little thought.' He ushered Harry through the opening.
'Do you think we should?' asked Harry anxiously, remembering the curt,

nightmarish announcement they had just heard.



'Probably not,' grinned the Doctor mischievously, turning to close the panel
behind them.

At that moment, Harry caught a glimpse of something moving, just at the
point where the gallery ahead curved out of sight. Something appeared to slither
quickly across the floor; he had a momentary impression of a pulsating cluster
of fluorescent bubbles, and of a faint crackling sound like toffee paper. He froze,
speechless with fright, then grabbed the Doctor's sleeve.

'Doctor, there's something there,' he whispered, pointing to the spot. The
gallery stretched in a graceful arc, the bright stars gliding slowly across the
observation panels.

The Doctor looked doubtful. 'Trick of the light, Harry,' he shrugged.
'No. I saw something moving,' Harry insisted. He crept forward a few

metres. Suddenly he found his stockinged feet glued firmly to the floor. He gave
a startled yelp, and looked slowly down. He had stepped on a faint, silvery trail
of sticky substance—about thirty centimetres wide—which traversed the gallery
from wall to wall.

The Doctor knelt down and examined it closely through his magnifier.
'Fascinating,' he exclaimed at last. 'Just like the track left by a gastropodmollusc.'

Harry stared incredulously at him. 'A snail? That size?' He tore his feet
free from the adhesive trail, leaving wisps of wool stuck fast to the floor. 'That's
impossible, Doctor, and anyway, how could it have got through there?' Harry
pointed to the fine-mesh grille set into the base of the inner wall, into which the
trail disappeared. The Doctor grunted, tracing the silver track across the gallery
and up the outer wall where it disappeared into a similar grille set between two
of the window panels.

'A multi-nucleate organism perhaps?' he said.
Harry's confidence began to return. Here was a subject about which he felt

he knew something. 'But surely, Doctor, such an organism would not be capable
of moving that fast...'

'Come on,' interrupted the Doctor, 'let's find Sarah first. Ah, this looks
promising.' He strode towards a panel in the inner wall, a few metres along from
the grating. As before, he knelt down and rested his forehead against the small
plate set into the wall, frowning in profound concentration. Nothing happened;
the panel remained shut. The Doctor stood up for a moment and mopped his
brow, then he leaned forward and tried again, his face creased with effort. After
a long pause, Harry jumped as the panel suddenly zipped open.. Even the Doctor
looked a trifle surprised.

'That must have been some idea you had.' Harry grinned admiringly.
The Doctor shrugged. 'Oh, just a little notion for a new opening gambit in

four-dimensional chess.'
They stepped into a small cubicle resembling a lift. The panel closed behind

them. They stood awkwardly nose to nose.
'Well, she's obviously not in here...' began Harry wearily. A rapid series of

extremely uncomfortable sensations pulsed through, his entire body, as if it were
expanding to the size of an elephant and at once contracting to that of a flea, and
then expanding again in quick succession.

'Decontamination Chamber,' said the Doctor, quite unaffected. Harry felt
as if he were being shaken to a jelly. 'Ultra high and low frequency oscillations,'



the Doctor added casually, 'confuses the microbes—much more efficient than
your old-fashioned antibiotics.'

When the vibrations stopped, a second panel opened in the opposite wall,
revealing a long straight tunnel bathed in soft greenish light. Another moving
track carried them smoothly and swiftly along it.

'This must lead to the central hub-structure,' said the Doctor eagerly. He
continued to mutter to himself, gesturing from side to side at the fluorescent
systems-displays which lit up one by one as they passed. Harry struggled to keep
upright as they glided along, his head whirling like a stone at the end of a long
string. Without warning, the Doctor put out his hand towards the wall of the
tunnel and the conveyor stopped moving. Harry all but fell flat on his face.

The Doctor was staring at a large, complex display marked:

NEURO ADVANCE/RETARD PULSORS
The display consisted of a mass of regularly arranged, tiny neon lamps with

illuminated connecting circuits. Somewere pulsingweakly, others were inactive,
and a few were flashing strongly with a long slow rhythm. The Doctor's eyes
widened: 'Harry, do you realise what all this is?' he said excitedly, removing
his hand from the wall and setting the floor in motion again with a jerk. 'It's a
complete Cryogenic Suspension System inside a converted Navigation Satellite.'
But Harry scarcely heard; he was still clutching his aching head. The Doctor
stopped the conveyor every few metres to examine the complex displays of
coded circuitry which lit up as if by magic. He grew more and more animated.
'There's not the slightest doubt...' he cried... 'Fascinating...' Harry could only
manage a groan of pain and confusion.

When they reached the far end of the softly-lit tunnel, they were confronted
with yet another panel. It bore a stencilled identification:
ACCESS CHAMBER: TECHNOP PERSONNEL

FIRST MEDTECH ONLY
The Doctor immediately took out his ear trumpet and placed the horn

against the bulkhead frame. He listened intently for a while. 'We're in luck,
Harry,' he said at last. 'The release-lag relay has operated—we can go in.' Harry
was not at all sure that was a good thing, but he was in no condition to protest.

They entered a 'fat' crescent-shaped chamber, much larger than those they
had already seen. One entire half of the straighter wall was patternedwith amulti-
coloured chequer-board of tiny coded panels. On the other side of a large access
panel in the centre of thewall, there was a series of semicircular observation ports
emitting a faint, bluish light. Opposite, set into the inner wall of the crescent,
was a couch, identical to the one in the Control Chamber from which Sarah had
disappeared, except that this one was covered by a curved transparent shield.
Control consoles, elegant flat structures supported on single struts, were grouped
all round the chamber. The subdued lighting gave the chamber a solemn, church-
like atmosphere.

'We're getting warm, Harry,' said the Doctor, striding over to examine first
the couch, then the control consoles.



Harry shivered; on the contrary, it seemed to him to be decidedly chillier
in here. He tottered over and leaned against the chequered section of wall, still
feeling the effects of the Decontamination Chamber. He stared across at the
empty couch. 'Well, she certainly isn't here ,' he said.

Totally absorbed, the Doctor darted over to peer through the observation
ports: ' Balaenoptera musculus ,' he exclaimed, his eyes brightening.

'The Blue Whale,' Harry translated mechanically. Then he froze.
Something had touched him on the shoulder from behind, and pushed him

firmly away from the wall. He staggered forward, mute with terror, and collapsed
in a heap. The Doctor glanced round. His enormous eyes opened wide. He leaped
over the spreadeagled Harry with a cry. Harry dared not turn his head.

'Just look at this ,' the Doctor shouted delightedly. One of the little coded
panels had sprung open, revealing itself to be a long narrow drawer, packed with
what looked like miniature tape cassettes. The Doctor quickly opened several
others. 'Everything they considered worth preserving,' said the Doctor slowly.
'Architecture... Electronics... Agriculture... Music... the sum of human
knowledge... here.'

'Who... I mean what for...?' muttered Harry, hauling himself to his feet.
'Posterity?' shrugged the Doctor, wandering thoughtfully round the

chamber. He suddenly stopped directly in front of Harry. 'What's missing,
Harry?' he demanded. Harry was about to point out that for one thing Sarah
was missing, when the Doctor seized him by the arm and marched him over to
the observation ports. Harry screwed up his eyes and peered into one marked
ANIMAL AND BOTANIC.

Dim shapes hung in the cobalt gloom. For a moment Harry thought he
glimpsed an elephant—or rather two elephants—and something that looked very
like a palm tree. He backed away, rubbing his eyes. 'Please, Doctor,' he implored,
'the straightforward human mind isn't capable of...'

'Exactly,' the Doctor smiled. 'Man—The Human Species is quite
conspicuously absent.' He sat down and gestured around him. 'If we assume that
some catastrophe occurred on Earth and that, before the end, this Satellite was
converted to function as a Cryogenic Preservation System...'

'A sort of Noah's Ark,' said Harry. The Doctor nodded...
'... The missing element is Man himself. What has happened to the Human

Species, Harry?' The Doctor fixed Harry with a penetrating stare and leaned back
on the instrument panel, his elbow depressing a series of touch-buttons...

From behind the reflecting surfaces of the chamber walls came the subdued
clatter of relays operating. With a sonorous humming, a section of the wall slid
slowly aside. The space beyond was filled with a faint, iridescent glow quite
unlike anything Harry had ever seen. A wave of coldness enveloped them, as if a
long imprisoned breath had been released from the phosphorescent depths with
an almost audible sigh. It was as if the chamber beyond were whispering to itself.

Awestruck, Harry followed the Doctor over to the opening, and stood at his
shoulder. They were on the threshold of an immensely tall chamber composed of
three semicircular bays arranged around a broad shaft rising through the centre.
At its widest, the chamber was at least thirty metres across. Alcoved sections,
each containing a covered pallet, were grouped side by side around the bays.
The rows of recessed pallets were ranged in storeys stretching out of sight into



pitch darkness above them, and each storey was surrounded by a narrow gallery
connected to the circular central shaft by catwalks. The criss-cross of glinting
metal tracery reminded Harry of the framework of an airship stood on end.

The phosphorescent light filling the chamber came from the translucent
shields protecting the pallets; each shield was moulded to the contours of the
human form. As their eyes became accustomed to the alien half-light, the Doctor
and Harry discerned the outline of a human body suspended in each alcove. In
the cold silence the effect was like that of entering a huge mausoleum.

'What a pl...' began Harry. His voice rang and reverberated round the
chamber. He went on in an abashed whisper, 'What a place for aMortuary. Look,
Doctor, there must be hundreds of them.'

The Doctor advanced a few paces, craning upwards with an air of respect.
'This is noMortuary, Harry. Quite the reverse. It's an old principle, but I've never
seen it applied on this scale before.'

As they began to walk slowly round, staring up at the seemingly endless
array of bodies, Harry tried to conceal his unease beneath an air of professional
detachment. 'When you've seen one corpse you've seen them all,' he shrugged.

The Doctor wandered into the shadows of the next bay, peering through the
shields as if examining exhibits in a museum. 'These people are not dead, Harry,
they're asleep.' He continued to speak, his voice rising and echoing majestically
around the vast vaults. '... Homo Sapiens... what an indomitable species... it is
only a few million years since it crawled up out of the sea and learned to walk...
a puny defenceless biped... it has survived flood, plague, famine, war... and now
here it is out among the stars... awaiting a new life. That's something for you to
be proud of, Harry... Harry ! What do you think you are doing?'

The Doctor had made a complete circuit of the chamber, and come upon
Harry examining the pupils of an occupant whose shield he had managed to
prise open. Harry pointed to the slim, fair-haired young man lying there inert
with open, staring eyes. He was dressed in a simple white uniform with green
identification flashes. There was no colour in his face, and his skin was waxen
and cold.

'There you are, Doctor,' said Harry triumphantly, 'not a flicker of life.'
'Suspended Animation,' retorted the Doctor, pushing Harry aside and

quickly closing the shield.
'But there are no metabolic functions at all,' protested Harry. 'Even in the

deepest coma you will, find that the...'
'Total Cryogenic Suspension, Harry,' the Doctor interrupted impatiently.

'You can't survive ten thousand years in a coma.'
Harry stared at the shrouded figure. 'Ten... thousand years?' he said. 'That's

impossible...'
'Oh, ten thousand... fifty thousand—the time is immaterial. Provided, of

course, that no one interferes with the systems,' the Doctor added pointedly.
Harry glanced wildly about at the ranks of inert human bodies, his mind reeling.
The Doctor spoke in an almost reverent hush. 'The future of the entire human
race in one chamber.'

Carefully he checked that the pallet Harry had opened was firmly closed
and sealed again. 'Come along, Harry,' he said. 'We must find Sarah, and then
take our leave. We're intruders here.'



Anxious not to irritate the Doctor any further, Harry resisted the flood of
questions rising in his mind and followed him towards the entrance. As he turned
for a last look at. the awesome spectacle, Harry's heart missed a beat; his shoeless
feet were suddenly held in a fierce grip that all but toppled him over.

'Doctor, look ,' he breathed. Hewas stuck fast to another silvery trail snaking
across the floor of the chamber. It was identical to the one they had found earlier.
It disappeared into a grille at the base of the central shaft.

The Doctor dropped to his knees and began tracing the sticky trail as it
wound away into the shadows.

'Perhaps it's some kind of mould,' suggested Harry.
'But you said you saw something moving before,' the Doctor reminded him.

Harry shivered and looked uneasily around. He remembered the Doctor's
reference to giant snails.

Something caught his eye in one of the pallets in the opposite bay. It looked
different from the others. The Doctor was busy trying to scrape off a sliver of the
tacky substance with the probe. On tip-toe, his socks still sticking slightly to the
floor, Harry cautiously approached the pallet. As he peered into it, he thought
he detected a swirling, vaporous movement. Glancing round to make sure the
Doctor was still occupied, Harry eased open the magnetic shield...

There, her skin like chalk and her body cold and rigid, lay Sarah Jane Smith.
For a moment Harry was speechless, riveted by Sarah's fixed, expressionless
gaze. Then he gasped 'Sarah...'

The Doctor was at his side in an instant, ready to reprove him for his
meddlesome ways. When he saw Sarah his huge eyes nearly popped out of his
head. Very quietly he said, 'There's nothing we can do for her, Harry.'
Instinctively Harry moved forward to lift Sarah out of the pallet. The Doctor
firmly gripped him by the arm. 'We're too late,' he whispered. 'She's become part
of the process. We'll only harm her if we interfere now.'

Harry stared at him in horror. 'There must be something I can do,' he cried.
Shaking his head firmly, the Doctor started to close the magnetic shroud.

'Sarah will remain like that for a thousand years at least.'
'Not if I can help it,' said Harry defiantly. Earlier he had noticed the outlines

of coded inspection panels set into the central shaft. He gestured hope-fully
towards them. 'Couldn't we break into the works?' he pleaded. 'Reverse the
process or something?' But again the Doctor shook his head resolutely.

On a sudden impulse, Harry darted across to the shaft and began clawing
frantically at the smooth, sealed edges of the panels. Before the Doctor could
restrain him, he had sprung open a hatch the size of a door. He found himself
staring into a dark cubicle, and for a split second he caught a glimpse of an
enormous locust-like figure with gigantic eyes, looming over him like an insect
Buddha. Then, as he sprang backwards with a scream of terror, something
toppled slowly past him with a sickening crunching sound. There was a clatter of
brittle tentacles and antennae which fractured and scattered a gelatinous cobweb
substance all over him.

3 Sabotage!
Harry stood with his back pressed against the curved wall of the shaft. He

was trembling, and his face was beaded with sweat. He stared at the enormous
'insect' which lay crumbling at his feet. The surface of its segmented body was



a glossy indigo colour; here and there were patches of twisted and blackened
tissue, like scorched plastic. The six tentacular legs bristled with razor-sharp
'hairs'. The creature's octopus head contained a huge globular eye on each side,
and each eye was composed of thousands of cells in which Harry saw himself
reflected over and over again. The creature was fully three metres long from the
top of its domed head to the tip of the fearsome pincer in which its tail terminated.

At last Harry managed to speak. 'At least it's dead,' he gasped.
The Doctor calmly picked up a shattered length of tentacle which powdered

and crumbled in his fingers. 'Practically mummified,' he nodded.
'Just look at the size of its brain pan,' said Harry, his fear gradually giving

way to fascination.
'Clearly a creature of considerable intelligence,' murmured the Doctor,

taking out his magnifying glass and probe. He knelt down beside the massive
corpse.

'But what is it?' Harry asked, amazed at the Doctor's apparently fearless
curiosity. The Doctor always liked to have a ready answer for his insatiably
inquisitive human companions, but this was one occasion when he found himself
rather at a loss. He did not answer, but became totally absorbed in an anatomical
investigation.

Harry remained with his back firmly against the shaft, afraid to move. He
looked across at Sarah. She seemed to stare straight back at him, her face an
impassive mask. Harry imagined the open eyes of all the other humans 'sleeping'
in the vast chamber, staring sightlessly at their own reflections in the polished
surfaces, for perhaps thousands of years the Doctor had said, their bodies without
heartbeat or consciousness, yet alive.

Suddenly he felt a prickling sensation at the back of his neck. In one of
the pallets the phosphorescent glow seemed to have intensified. It grew rapidly
brighter until he could hardly bear to look at it, and the silhouette of the occupant
appeared to undulate with the same rhythm as an eerie wobbling hum that filled
the chamber and made Harry cover his ears. The glare and the vibrations
overwhelmed him for a moment. When he came to, he saw the Doctor standing
motionless in front of the pallet which was now quiet again. The shield was open.
Harry moved cautiously round the central shaft to avoid the huge crumbling
corpse, and padded across the chamber to join the Doctor.

The pallet was occupied by a dark-haired woman in her thirties, wearing
the same simple white uniform with green flashes as the young man Harry had
examined earlier. But the young woman's skin was glowing with healthy colour,
and Harry noticed that her pupils were dilating and contracting. She lay with her
arms at their sides, palms outward. In her wrist, Harry's practised eye caught the
beat of a regular pulse.

Suddenly, her slim body arched in a spasm of pain; then it relaxed with a
gasping intake of breath. She lay panting for a few moments, her head rolling
from side to side. Then her eyes focussed on the Doctor. A shadow of
incomprehension passed across her face. Slowly she brought her hands together
and stared at them. Then she looked up again at the Doctor, her fingers making
urgent grasping movements.

'Please do not be alarmed,' the Doctor said gently. 'We are friends.'
'She wants us to help her up,' said Harry, hurrying forward.



'No, Harry. I think this is what she needs.' The Doctor leaned across and
took a small transparent container from a holder fitted to the inside of the pallet
cover. Visible inside the container were several coloured spheres, like billiard
balls, and a gleaming instrument resembling a spray gun.

'I shouldn't have opened the shield,' muttered the Doctor, watching intently
as the woman eagerly took out the spray gun, and carefully fitted one of the small
spherical objects into the base of the handle. She then pressed the star-shaped
nozzle against her forehead and operated a button. There was a brief high-pitched
whirr. The woman's body convulsed and then went limp. After a few moments,
she rose gracefully from the pallet and stood motionless, fixing the Doctor and
Harry with a piercing stare. She was fully two metres tall, and even the Doctor
seemed a little disconcerted by her detached, authoritative air. She betrayed no
emotion at her awakening.

'Explain your presence here,' she suddenly ordered in a toneless, clinical
voice. She seemed neither surprised nor afraid.

'Well, there's very little to explain,' began the Doctor amiably. 'We are
travellers in space and time like yourself.'

The woman walked slowly round them. 'That is not adequate,' she retorted.
Harry felt extremely uncomfortable under her cold, relentless stare. 'My

name's Sullivan... Surgeon Lieutenant Harry Sullivan... and this... this is the
Doctor,' he mumbled.

The woman's eyes widened. 'You claim to be Medtechs?' The note of
incredulity in her voice suddenly made her seem a little more human.

'Oh, my Doctorate is purely honorary,' said the Doctor with a conciliatory
smile, 'and Harry here is...'

The woman raised her hand imperiously for silence. 'My name is Vira. I am
First Medtech,' she announced.

'How very fortunate,' said the Doctor. 'We have a dear young friend over
there who needs your help desperately.' He pointed across the chamber to where
Sarah lay.

For a moment, Vira stared at the Doctor, evidently on her guard. Then she
walked gracefully across to Sarah's pallet. She looked at Sarah without emotion.
'The female is an intruder, like yourselves,' she said icily. Vira turned abruptly
away, as if losing all interest in them. 'She was not among the Chosen,' she said,
looking round at the inert and shadowy forms surrounding them. She appeared
to be listening, waiting—her eyes alert and shining.

'Well, she's among the Chosen now , isn't she?' blurted out Harry. Vira
turned a withering, blank stare upon him. Harry retreated a step and bit his lip,
regretting his sarcasm.

The Doctor intervened gently. 'Is there any method of reversing the
Cryogenic function at this stage?'

'It would be dangerous,' Vira replied distantly. 'Is the female of value?'
This was too much for Harry. 'What kind of question is that?' he exploded,

wincing as the Doctor stood firmly on his stockinged toes.
'She is of great value to us,' the Doctor said quietly.
Vira hesitated a moment, then passed her hand over a section of the pallet

frame, activating a small fluorescent systems display. 'Neural activity is rapidly
receding,' she declared. 'I will discharge a monod block.' Vira took out the



instruments from the pallet kit, and repeated the procedure she had performed
upon herself earlier. She pressed the probe against Sarah's temple and triggered
the charge. 'The female will revive soon, or die,' she said flatly, replacing the
equipment in the holder. 'At this stage, the action of anti-protonic is not
predictable.'

Vira turned. On the far side of the chamber, the pallet next to her own was
beginning to glow and to emit the same pulsing hum which had heralded her
own awakening. There was a sudden yielding in her face. 'Commander,' she
whispered, crossing swiftly into the vibrating glare. 'This is our Prime Unit—
Noah.'

Harry shielded his eyes, and turned to the Doctor.
'As in Noah's Ark, eh?' he said.
'Your colony speech has no meaning,' said Vira. 'We called him Noah as

an amusement.'
'A joke,' Harry corrected her.
Vira nodded gravely, her eyes fixed on the incandescent shield of the pallet.

'There was not much joke in the last days,' she added quietly.
TheDoctormoved to her side. LikeVira, he seemed unaffected by the fierce

light. 'What happened during those last days on Earth?' he asked gently.
Without taking her eyes from the pallet, Vira replied in amazement, 'Has

your colony no records? Where are you from?'
'Well, Harry's from Earth, and I...' began the Doctor.
'That is not possible,' said Vira. 'The solar flares destroyed all life on the

Earth.'
The Doctor nodded. 'Of course, solar flares.'
Vira opened the shield, now that the radiation had subsided, and checked

the pallet systems-display. 'We calculated that it would be ten thousand years
before the biosphere became viable again,' she said.

'At the very least,' agreed the Doctor. 'But I think you have overslept by
several thousand years. When we arrived, we found a massive systems failure.
Your alarm clock failed to work.'

Vira shook her head. 'The systems have a negative fault capacity,' she
replied sharply.

The Doctor took her firmly by the arm. 'Possibly,' he said. 'But at some time
you have had other visitors besides ourselves.' He led Vira across the chamber
into the bay beyond the central shaft, where the monstrous corpse of the locust-
like creature lay in the shadows. Vira showed no fear, only surprise. The Doctor
watched her reaction closely. 'A truant from your Animal and Botanic Section
perhaps?' he suggested.

'What is it?' Vira demanded suspiciously.
'I don't know yet,' said the Doctor, peering into one of the creature's great

yellow eyes. 'But it had some purpose in coming here...'
'What purpose?' said Vira, suddenly tense, her eyes roaming over the ranks

of softly glowing pallets stretched all around and above them.
Before the Doctor could reply, she turned with a gasp and sped across the

chamber to Noah's pallet. The quiet, rhythmic pulse of light and sound had
become irregular and staccato. 'There is a fault in the Bionosphere,' she cried in



disbelief. She wrung her hands in desperation. Harry was amazed at her sudden
helplessness.

The Doctor swiftly ran his eye over the systems-display. 'There is an
optimum overload in the central power supply,' he said. 'We must prevent a
cascade tripout.'

Vira gestured to the other pallets in the bay. 'But we have no Technops,
Doctor,' she cried. 'The Programme was planned so that First Technops and First
Medtechs would undergo simultaneous Revivification.' Again she stared
suspiciously at them. 'There has been interference,' she added threateningly.

The Doctor strode towards the Access Chamber. 'I think I can help you,' he
said. 'Harry, you keep an eye on Sarah while I'm gone.' Before Vira could protest
he ran out of the chamber.

Meanwhile, deep in the Infrastructure of the Satellite, far down inside the
central hub of the great wheel where, little by little over the centuries, energy
from the pale and distant Sun had been focussed and stored in huge reservoirs,
a voracious alien life-form had established its lair. The surfaces of many of the
spherical reservoirs were covered in a glistening, bubbling substance which
pulsated in the dull amber glow of the chamber. Here and there, along the
conduits connecting one reservoir to another, slid clusters of viscous matter
which stretched out and then gathered again into globules with a dry crackling
sound.

As it spread slowly over the surface. of the reservoirs, the substance became
denser, more opaque and brittle. Occasionally the crackling globules formed
weird, nightmare shapes which swelled and then burst into long, twisting fronds,
hissing and spitting like snakes. Colossal quantities of the precious energy were
absorbed by the parasite bubbles, so that the vital systems of the Satellite were
increasingly starved of essential power...

The Doctor swiftly made his way from the Cryogenic-Section back to the
Control Centre where the TARDIS had materialised. As he hurried along the
softly-lit tunnels, he paused briefly to examine fresh trails of the tacky, silver
substance clinging to the floors, walls and even ceilings. He was rapidly
becoming convinced that something was, at that very moment, engaged in a
destructive attack on the Satellite from within. He crept with the stealth of a
predator stalking its prey—well aware that he himself might be the prey of an as
yet unknown enemy. Reaching the smaller Control Chamber, from which Sarah
had disappeared, the Doctor set to work with the sonic screwdriver, skilfully
rearranging a mass of circuits in an attempt to provide sufficient power to the
Cryogenic systems.

As he worked, he was aware of an insidious, evil force infiltrating the
innermost parts of the Satellite; a hidden enemy ready to attack at any moment.

In the Cryogenic Chamber, Harry waited helplessly at Sarah's side while
Vira concentrated on the life and death struggle of her own people. She glided
from pallet to pallet, checking the systems-displays, and occasionally
administering treatment with an array of instruments whose functionHarry could
only guess at.

'I should have gone myself,' she said at last, returning to Noah's pallet. 'You
are Dawn Timers; your companion has no knowledge of our Satellite.'



'Oh, he's an absolute wizard with bits of wire and things,' said Harry with
desperate optimism. 'He'll have it all ticking over in no time.'

At that moment the oscillations in Noah's pallet settled into a steady rhythm
again. Vira checked the display, then she turned to Harry. 'The fault has
corrected,' she smiled. 'Noah will soon revive.'

'Harry?' The Doctor's voice boomed out in the adjacent Access Chamber.
Harry hurried through. Over the intercom the Doctor asked whether the power
had been restored in the Cryogenic systems. He said that his lash-up in the
Control Centre would not be adequate for very long, and that he suspected a
major fault in the Solar Stacks. 'I'm going down to take a look, Harry,' he boomed.

'O.K., Doctor,' said Harry apprehensively. 'But don't be too long...' There
came an uncommunicative grunt from the intercom and then silence. Harry
padded back into the Cryogenic Chamber, to find Vira stretching out her hand in
greeting to a tall, slim but powerful man with short black hair and a trim beard.
He was holding out his hands to her in a simple gesture of recognition.

'Then it is ended, Vira. We are alive again,' the man said gently.
'And together, Commander,' smiled Vira.
Feeling rather superfluous, Harry wandered across to Sarah's pallet, and

stood watching for a flicker of returning consciousness.
'Who is this?' Harry swung round at the ice-cold enquiry. Noah was staring

at him with blazing eyes.
'The name's Sullivan... sir,' Harry began.
Noah turned to Vira in disbelief. 'A regressive... here?' he exclaimed.
'I'm no regressive,' retorted Harry, 'I am a Naval Officer.'
'Clearly a Regressive—the speech patterns are unmistakable,' said the

Commander in a hollow, detached tone that sent a shiver through Harry. Vira
explained briefly about the Doctor and his companions. Noah continued to stare
at Harry with intense hostility. 'There was a Regressive element among the
volunteers for Colony Seven,' he said at last. He looked Harry up and down,
staring at his crumpled clothes and shoeless feet in undisguised disgust. 'Our
Genetic Pool has been refined to the ultimate,' Noah almost shouted, turning
upon Vira. 'You must be aware that three random units could threaten our
survival... and the contamination factor... irrevocable damage may already have
occurred.'

Suddenly there came a gasp from behind Harry. He whirled about, and was
delighted to see that Sarah's eyelids were flickering. He took her hands. 'Come
on, old girl,' he cried. 'I know you can do it.

Vira hesitated a moment under her Commander's furious gaze. Then she
said quietly, 'The Council can decide, Commander,' and walked quickly over
to Sarah's pallet, and began monitoring her progress. 'Your companion had not
reached total metabolic suspension,' she murmured to Harry. 'She will revive
soon.'

Harry took a step towards the Access Chamber. 'We must tell the Doctor.'
Noah approached Harry menacingly. 'Where is the third Regressive?' he

demanded.
'He's having a look at your... er... Solar Stacks,' said Harry in euphoric relief

at Sarah's imminent recovery. 'He reckons they're on the blink.'



'The Solar Reservoirs,' hissed Noah. 'He must be stopped.' The Commander
spun round and ran from the chamber.

His improvised rearrangement of the main power circuits completed, the
Doctor quickly found his way from the Control Centre down into the very heart
of the Satellite. As he opened shutter after shutter, on his guard for whatever
might be lurking on the other side, he puzzled over Harry's description of the
bubbling phenomenon he had seen, and tried to relate it to the gigantic corpse
they had discovered in the Cryogenic Chamber. He encountered more and more
silver trails criss-crossing the tunnels, emerging from and disappearing into the
grilled openings.

He soon found himself confronting a large circular door, similar to that of
a strongroom, bearing a stark warning in luminous stencilling:
SOLAR PLASMA CELLS EXTREME RADIATION

HAZARD FIRST TECHNOPS ONLY
The Doctor smiled to himself; after a few minutes' juggling with ear

trumpet, pocket magnet and probe, he succeeded in operating the lock. The door
—a fifty centimetres thick Radiation Shield—swung open smoothly. Cautiously
the Doctor entered the vast hemispherical chamber. His eyes adapted
immediately to the subdued orange glowwithin. One by one he began examining
the ceramic plasma bottles—translucent spheres five metres in diameter.

'Well, well,' he murmured, 'the old vacuum plasma method—with a few
little refinements. They must have been in a hurry to leave Earth. Not a bad lash-
up at all.'

Everything seemed to be in order. Then the Doctor detected, amid the
almost imperceptible humming of the chamber, a brittle crackling sound, which
was growing steadily louder and closer. He crouched beneath one of the
reservoirs and listened. Although there was no sensation of hotness from the
super-heated plasma, the Doctor knew that even he could not stand exposure to
the radiation for more than a minute or two. But he had to discover what was
causing the colossal power drain in the Systems.

The crackling sounds came from above. Staring upwards at the dim outlines
of the plasma globes, he suddenly saw the clusters of pustular matter clinging to
several of them, and to the interconnecting shafts. Stealthily, the Doctor emerged
from hiding and inched his way towards a ladder leading up to the next level.
Crouching close to the treads of the ladder, he reached the second catwalk safely
and began to climb to the third level. Sections of the metalwork felt tacky, and
they glistened with the familiar silver deposit. When he was halfway up the third
ladder, the crackling sounds suddenly increased and the movement of the
jostling, bursting bubbles quickened.

Instinctively the Doctor flung himself backwards, just as a snaking tentacle
of globule lashed through the gloom towards his head. He tumbled heavily down
the ladder on to the landing below. Drenched in sweat, his ears splitting from
the harsh crackling and his head aching from the fall, the Doctor scrambled back
into the narrow space between two reservoirs. He watched in fascinated horror
as a quivering mass of greenish bubbles began to form underneath the catwalk
over him, oozing through the steel mesh. It grew into a shapeless glob the size of
a man; then elongated itself into a droplet. Just in time, the Doctor ducked back



as it whipped out at him with a vicious crack. Missing its target, it broke into
fragments which stuck to the metal rails, sizzling like hot fat a few centimetres
from the Doctor's face.

He quickly looped a length of scarf round a stanchion and dived through
the railings of the catwalk, swinging down to the floor. Darting through the
Radiation Shield, he dragged it shut behind him and ran swiftly back to the
Control Centre. The savage crackling of the globule as it had massed to attack
him still filled his head. The Doctor knew that he must find some way to starve
the alien creature of energy and stop it from multiplying and spreading through
the Satellite; he also knew that to tamper with the Solar Plasma System could
be catastrophic.

Reaching the Control Centre, the Doctor sought out the Solar Systems
Panel. He stood for a moment staring at the complex displays; one slip and an
irreversible chain reaction would occur. He decided that the risk had to be taken.
He bent over the console and began to calculate the exact sequence in which the
system would have to be run down.

'Stand away from the systems console.'
The Doctor glanced over his shoulder in surprise. He recognised Noah

standing in the entrance to the Control Chamber Suite. Noah was pointing a
small, torchlike weapon straight at the Doctor's head.

'Ah there you are, awake at last.' The Doctor smiled. 'I'm just about to close
down the Solar Plasma Systems.'

'Move away,' said Noah. 'The Terra Nova is ours.'
'In theory certainly,' agreed the Doctor, turning back to his task. 'But unless

we do something quickly, it will not be yours much longer.'
Noah advanced a few paces, levelling the weapon. 'Degenerate Seventh

Colonists,' he sneered. 'Your pathetic attempt at sabotage has failed.'
The Doctor turned to face him and stood upright. He spoke rapidly but

calmly. 'There is some alien life-form feeding on the energy in your Solar
Reservoirs, and if we do not stop it at once it may completely overrun your
Satellite.'

Noah broke into a mocking laugh. 'You and your companions are the only
alien forms here,' he cried. 'It is you who must be stopped.'

There was a brilliant sheet of spark from Noah's hand. The Doctor was
momentarily enveloped in a blue aura. He froze, his hand raised and his mouth
half open to speak. He did not move.



4 A Fatal Wound

Full of professional admiration, Harry watched Vira moving calmly about
the Cryogenic Chamber, monitoring the progress of her people as the
Revivification Programme entered the final phase of its preliminary stage. From
time to time, he glanced anxiously at Sarah; she did not appear to be responding
to the treatment Vira had given her earlier. Vira now seemed completely
oblivious of them both, and the Doctor's long absence was making Harry feel
extremely uneasy. Suddenly Sarah began to moan, and her body convulsed.
Harry moved to help her.

'Do not touch the female,' snapped Vira, without looking round.
'Now look here,' said Harry. 'I am a fully qualified physician and I do think

I...'
'You have no function here,' retorted Vira dismissively. 'You are intruders.'
'Charming,' muttered Harry to himself. 'If it weren't for the Doctor, neither

you nor your people would be alive now.'
'The Commander will not permit contamination of the Genetic Pool,' said

Vira in a hard voice. 'All Regressive influences must be eliminated.'
Harry gasped at the sinister tone of her words. At the same instant he turned,

just in time to catch Sarah as she toppled forward. He eased her gently back into
the pallet and checked her pulse. It fluttered weakly. He looked across at Vira,
but she was totally preoccupied. All at once Sarah screamed—a terrifying hoarse
cry that ripped through Harry's head. He caught her again as she staggered out of
the pallet, staring with wide, panic-stricken eyes at the corpse of the giant 'locust'
creature lying in the shadows. The shock brought Sarah to in a flash.

'What... what is it... ?' she whispered, clinging fast to Harry's arm. He was
overjoyed to hear her speak, and put his arm protectively round her shoulders.

'Oh, we found it in the cupboard,' he said nonchalantly. 'Sort of galactic
woodworm, old girl.'

Sarah stared around her open-mouthed. 'Where's the Doctor?' she asked
shakily.

Before Harry could answer, Vira's voice pierced the quiet humming of the
chamber. 'Where is Dune?' she demanded. Sarah jumped with fright. Vira was
pointing to an empty pallet near where the Doctor and Harry had found the tacky
trail on the chamber floor.

Sarah glanced at Harry for some explanation, but he was staring blankly
at Vira as she approached them, shaking with anger. 'What have you done with
Technop Dune?' she repeated. 'Answer me.' Sarah leaned heavily on Harry's arm,
faint and disorientated. Her face was white, and she was trembling all over. At
that moment, Noah's voice rang out over the intercom in the Access Chamber.

'Hear me, Vira... I am in Central Control. I discovered the third Regressive
attempting to sabotage the Solar Power Systems. He has been dealt with.'

'That means the Doctor,' Harry whispered as Vira hurried through into the
Access Chamber.



'Commander, hear me,' they heard her say into the intercom. 'Technop Dune
is missing; there is no explanation.'

'The explanation,' Noah hissed, 'is that the Regressives have taken him.
Proceed with Revivification. I shall inspect the Solar Chamber...'

Vira turned to see Harry and Sarah lingering uncertainly 'The Commander
will interrogate you when he returns,' she said, brushing past them and resuming
her Medtech duties.

Harry started as Sarah suddenly gripped his arm.
'Come on,' she whispered. Harry looked at her in astonishment. 'We must

find the Doctor,' she said urgently.
'Well... yes, but are you sure you're... you're...' Harry stammered.
Sarah smiled broadly. 'Are you all right, Harry?' she asked. 'You look a

little pale.'
Harry was speechless. He shook his head in admiration at Sarah's

remarkable recovery. 'You really are amazing, old girl,' he chuckled.
With a glance to check that Vira was occupied, Sarah ran lightly across the

Access Chamber to the panel leading to the tunnel. 'Do you know the way to
Central Control?' she whispered.

Harry pulled himself together. 'I think so...' he muttered.
Sarah beckoned impatiently. 'Then show me how to open this thing, and

let's go,' she said.
Noah opened the Radiation Shield and entered the Solar Chamber. His

movements were slow and clumsy, hampered by the heavy protective suit he now
wore. At first, the thick transparent helmet muffled the vicious crackling sounds
echoing round the chamber, but as Noah advanced further in, they rose to a
crescendo. Noah faltered and stopped. Through the vizor he glimpsed something
whipping towards his face. Restricted by the suit, he had no chance of twisting
aside in time. Something caught the sleeve of his suit and gouged a deep,
scorching tear. Confined inside the helmet, Noah was deafened by his own
scream.

He staggered backwards down the metal ladder, the torch-shaped weapon
sparking in his hand. His forearm burned beneath the gashed sleeve. He backed
clumsily towards the open Shield, blinded with sweat and barely conscious.
There was a hideous sensation in his injured arm, as if a column of stinging ants
was forcing its way through the veins. He squeezed through the opening into
the access tunnel and dragged the Shield shut. He leaned against it, gasping for
breath, and tried to remove the glove from his damaged hand, but the helmet had
steamed up and he could not see properly. Whimpering with pain, he fought to
remove the helmet, his spasmodic breathing echoing inside it. At last the helmet
came free and smashed on the tunnel floor. Noah dropped to his knees, and then
slowly keeled over on his side.

His eyes bulging with terror, he brought the injured arm across in front of
his face; the deep tear in the sleevewas filled with a greenish bubbling pus which,
as he watched, seemed to be absorbed into his arm so that only the blackened
gash in the sleeve remained. With a harsh cry Noah rolled over on to his back,
the injured arm grotesquely fixed in the air. His whole body went rigid. His arm
lost all sensation and he blacked out. A wisp of acrid smoke curled up from the
scorched slit.



As they warily found their way to the Control Centre where Noah had
reported his encounter with the Doctor, Harry did his best to explain to Sarah
about the Satellite being a kind of 'Noah's Ark' bearing survivors from Earth, and
how she had somehow become caught up in the works.' For her part, Sarah could
remember very little about her experience in the Cryogenic Suspension System,
but she told Harry as much as she could.

Harry was relieved to discover that the bulkhead panels seemed to be
designed to operate on a straightforward 'electric eye' mechanism when
approached from the direction of the Cryogenic Chamber, and that they opened
automatically.

However, there was a tense moment when he and Sarah passed through the
shutter leading into the Control Centre Access Tunnel. Harry had passed through
first and the shutter had closed before Sarah could join him. He waited a few
moments for her to operate the photo-electric cell, but the panel remained tightly
closed. Harry struggled in vain to open it by resting his forehead against the little
copper plate and thinking about something complicated—just as the Doctor had
done—but he did not seem able to generate the correct brain-waves. Meanwhile,
Sarah had approached the 'electric eye' on the other side of the shutter, and had
been startled by a sharp crackling sound behind her which made her spin round;
a wobbling cluster of greenish bubbles was bursting through a grilled vent in
the floor a few metres from her feet, and forming itself into threatening serpent
shapes. With a shriek she had thrown herself against the panel, and as it opened,
toppled white-faced into Harry's arms.

In a few seconds they reached the Control Centre. The Doctor stood smiling
at them, his hand raised in greeting. 'Doctor... you're safe,' Sarah cried, rushing
over to hug him. She recoiled in horror when she realised that something was
badly wrong. Harry examined the Doctor's rigid fingers. 'What's the matter with
him... ?' whispered Sarah.

'I've no idea,' said Harry, trying to bend the Doctor's arm.
'Well you're a doctor. Do something,' she cried anxiously.
Harry frowned. 'It's just as if rigor mortis... but it can't be...' he muttered.

He put his ear to the Doctor's chest, first to the left then to the right side. 'His
hearts are beating,' he said at last with relief.

Feeling very faint, Sarah sank down on the corner of the couch beside which
the Doctor stood like a statue. She immediately sprang, to her feet again,
recollecting her earlier experience with theMatter Transmitter. But as she leaped
up she lost her balance, grabbed Harry's arm to save herself and they both
collided with the Doctor, so that he fell sideways. on to the couch. As he fell,
his forehead touched part of the exposed electronic circuitry in the base of the
couch. There was a bright flash and a popping sound. The Doctor sprang to his
feet, clutching his singed forelocks.

'Ah, Sarah. How nice to see you. Splendid,' he cried. 'Where's Noah?'
'Doctor, don't you think you should sit down for a moment?' said Harry

with concern.
'Sit down?' the Doctor exclaimed, staring incredulously at Harry. 'At a time

like this?' He winced, and clutched his temples. 'I detest paralysators. Highly
unreliable.' He looked around him. 'Where's Noah?' he repeated.

'He said he was going to examine the Solar Systems,' began Harry...



'Quick,' cried the Doctor, striding out of the chamber. 'There might still be
time to save him.'

Totally bewildered, Sarah and Harry followed. They hurried along the
Cincture Structure Gallery, on their guard against the crackling, bubbling alien
organism whose tracks became more and more evident.

'Strange how they've given us the run of the ship,'
Harry remarked. 'Why didn't Vira try to stop us?'
'Not her function, Harry,' called the Doctor over his shoulder. 'By the

Thirtieth Century, human society has become highly specialised. Vira is a
Medtech; we, I suspect, are an Executive problem.'

'Correct, Doctor, but not a difficult one. You can be easily eliminated.' The
snarling voice seemed to come from nowhere. They stopped in their tracks as
Noah, still clad in the radiation suit, emerged without warning from an alcove in
the gallery and barred their way. His left hand was held behind him, in his right
he brandished the paralysator gun.

'I am delighted to see you again, Noah,' smiled the Doctor, raising his hat.
'I suggest that without more ado we put our heads together and devise a prompt
solution to what is undoubtedly your most serious problem... Unless we destroy
the organism in the Solar Chamber it will...'

Noah gestured sharplywith the paralysator. 'Wewill return to the Cryogenic
Section,' he ordered. Harry and Sarah looked at the Doctor, uncertain how he
would handle this impasse. Suddenly the Doctor turned on his heel and set off
along the curving gallery at a furious pace.

'You're absolutely right,' he called. 'There's not a moment to lose.'
As they entered the Cryogenic Chamber, closely followed by Noah with

the paralysator still levelled at their backs, Vira was assisting a tall, blond young
man out of his pallet. As soon as he saw Noah he threw up his arms in front of
his face and cowered back into the alcove.

'No... No,' he screamed, his face contorted in panic. 'Keep away... Keep
back.'

'What is wrong?' demanded Noah in a hollow voice. The young man hid
his face, trembling and whimpering. Vira looked shocked.

'I do not understand, Commander,' she murmured. 'His responses were
normal.' She turned to the terrified youth. 'Libri... it is the Commander.
Commander Noah... do you not remember?' The young man relaxed a little, and
then lowered his arms.

'I... I am sorry, Commander,' he said. 'For an instant I saw... you were... I
saw something.'

The Doctor stepped eagerly forward. 'What did you see?' he asked.
'Silence,' Noah hissed, threatening the Doctor with the paralysator, his left

hand still concealed behind him.
The Doctor looked hard at Noah. 'What have you done to your hand?' he

asked calmly.
'No further warnings,' shrieked Noah hoarsely. He beckoned Libri to him.

Hesitantly Libri obeyed. Noah handed him the paralysator. 'Take these
Regressives to an Abeyance Unit,' he ordered. 'They will remain there until the
Council has convened. If they are disruptive, eliminate them.'



Everyone stared at Noah. His harsh manner and hoarse voice contrasted
violently with the restrained dignity of Vira and Libri. Viramoved towardsNoah.
'Commander,' she began, 'we should not...' but Noah ignored her.

'The Systems must be closed down. Revivification must cease at once.'
Vira and Libri exchanged shocked glances. 'Why, Commander?' said Vira

in disbelief.
'It is my instruction,' Noah shrieked, his voice breaking 'The Programme is

revised. I am Commander.'
Vira gestured round the shadowy, echoing chamber. 'Commander, the First

Phase has hardly begun; we have no Technops to operate the Systems.'
'I shall operate the Systems,' snarled Noah, shuddering as some kind of

spasm passed through him.
'Without First Technop Dune we cannot hope to succeed,' said Vira firmly.
'Who?' whispered Noah, trembling.
'Commander, I reported to you; Dune is missing.' Vira indicated the vacant

pallet.
'You are mistaken, Vira. Dune is here.' Noah's whisper rasped and echoed

around them. They stared at him. 'I am Dune,' he croaked, his face clouding as
if something within him was struggling to emerge, and his conscious mind was
fighting it back.

Vira suddenly moved towards him, but he backed away. 'Commander, you
are injured,' she cried. 'You are unwell.'

'Yes... No... I... Hear me...' Noah faltered, his face glistening with
perspiration. His body seemed twisted slightly inside the cumbersome radiation
suit. 'Revivification must be discontinued now... now...' He backed awkwardly
towards the Access Chamber, mumbling and whispering unintelligibly. All at
once, with a gasp of agony, he turned his back to them. He seemed to be tearing
at his injured arm. As he stumbled away through the Access Chamber he cried
out, as if uttering a curse, 'No more aliens...'

The Doctor looked straight into Libri's eyes. 'Noah must be stopped,' he
said. 'There was a systems fault during his Revivification—his brain is damaged.'

Vira went over and spoke to the youngMedtech in an urgent whisper. 'Libri,
there is no procedure for arresting Revivification. It would be fatal.'

Libri met their gaze calmly. 'Noah is our Commander,' he said.
The Doctor edged towards him. 'Can you be sure of that, Libri?' he asked.

Libri flourished the paralysator at him. The Doctor stepped a little closer; Sarah
caught Harry's sleeve in apprehension. The Doctor slowly took a large pocket
watch from his jacket. He let it swing gently on the end of its chain in front
of Libri's face. He spoke in a soft, rhythmic voice. 'Libri.... when you first saw
Noah... you had a subconscious impression... of something horrible... That was
not your Commander... was it?'

Libri gazed at the glittering watch, mesmerized. Then, when the Doctor
finished speaking, he looked up into the Doctor's huge, piercing eyes. 'Noahmust
be stopped,' he cried, and rushed out of the Cryogenic Chamber in pursuit.

At once the Doctor darted across to Technop Dune's empty pallet and began
poking about with the telescopic probe. Almost immediately, he took out the
magnifying glass and peered through it at the end of the extended rod. 'Of



course... of course. Why didn't it occur to me before?' He strode across the
chamber towards the gigantic corpse lying on the far side of the adjacent bay.

Vira swiftly overtook him, and stood in his path. 'It is not advisable for you
to leave,' she warned.

The Doctor handed her the magnifier, and held up the point of the probe
to examine. Impaled on it was a fragment of colourless, rubbery membrane.
'Perhaps this will convince you that we are not your enemy,' he said.

Vira stared at the fragment of tissue. 'What is it?'
The Doctor knelt down, and probed about in the collapsed abdomen of the

monstrous creature. 'It is almost too horrible to contemplate,' he murmured.
Completely mystified, Harry and Sarah watched over his shoulder. After a

few moments, the Doctor stood up. 'As I suspected, the egg-tube is empty,' he
announced.

'Egg-tube?' gasped Vira.
The Doctor gazed down at the corpse. 'The Queen Colonizer... the

Progenitor,' he said solemnly. They all stared at him. He looked round at them
one by one. 'Have you heard of the Eumenes?' he asked in a hushed voice.

'It's a species of wasp,' said Harry. 'It paralyses caterpillars and lays its eggs
in their corpses. When the larvae emerge they have an immediate food...' Harry's
voice trailed into silence. He looked at the Doctor in horror.

Vira put her hands to her face, speechless. Sarah covered her mouth as if
she were going to be sick. The Doctor walked round them, deep in thought.
'Strange how the same life-patterns recur throughout the Galaxy...' he mused.
'Dune was Power Systems Technician, I imagine,' he said, pausing beside Vira.
She nodded. 'The larvae went straight to the Solar Stacks,' the Doctor continued.
'They absorbed Dune's knowledge, as well as his tissues.'

Vira stared across at Dune's pallet, then around the huge chamber at the
thousands of sleeping humans. Suddenly she seemed to relax. 'The Creature's
larvae will perish in the Solar Chamber,' she said. 'The radiation will destroy
them.'

The Doctor shook his head. 'On the contrary,' he said. The larval organisms
are feeding on the Solar energy, and becoming more powerful every minute.'

Libri entered the Control Centre seconds behind Noah. He stood transfixed
in the entrance, watching his Commander staggering about the chambers, his
breath rasping and rattling, eyes rolling and body contracted into a grotesque
posture. His injured arm was held up across his face, and with his other hand
Noah repeatedly tore at the glove. Suddenly he stopped. Shaking his head slowly
from side to side he lowered the injured arm in front of him. With a sound of
water dripped into boiling fat, green pus began to bubble out through the seams
of the glove, the thick material splitting like paper.

'Commander,' gasped Libri, stepping forward.
With a hideous, shrieking cry Noah reeled to face him. 'Give me the

paralysator,' he croaked.
Libri backed away a pace. 'You... you are not well, Commander,' he

stammered.
Struggling to control his body, Noah advanced on him. 'I order you...' he

cried.



In his eyes Libri saw desperation and fear, and that made him hesitate for
a fatal fraction of a second. Noah seized the weapon with his good hand and
tried to twist it from Libri's grasp. The young Medtech stared at his leader like
a hypnotised animal. Then something flew through the air and cut him across
the face. He fell back, screaming and clawing at the intense burning sensation
in his eyes.

Noah wrenched the paralysator from him, and pressed the trigger at point
blank range. Libri's bodywas hurled across the chamber in a succession of frozen
shapes as pulse after pulse cracked into it.When the sparking ceased, Noah stared
in terror at the smouldering body of the young man welded to the panelling.
Then he dragged himself through into the inner chamber, the suppurating stump
of his left hand raised like a club. He hovered grotesquely over the Cryogenic
Systems Panel, moaning in anguish. His right hand clung fiercely to the sleeve
of the injured arm, fighting to prevent it from touching the sensitive controls...

The chambers and tunnels of the Satellite suddenly echoed with a clear,
crystal-toned chime which was followed immediately by a calm female voice.
'Greetings to the TerraNova... You have slept for longer than the recorded history
of Humanity... you awaken now in the dawn of a New Era...' Noah stood
immobilised in a twisted posture, his face betraying recognition of the High
Minister's voice, and the shock of the returning memory of his own humanity.
The voice echoed on... 'You will return to an Earth that we cannot imagine... a
world that is dead... You must make it flourish and live again...'

Noah's body twisted this way and that as the human and the alien fought for
supremacy within him. His mind was filled with the great purpose about which
the High Minister was speaking, yet he felt himself inexorably overwhelmed by
the destructive alien consciousness that was steadily possessing his mind and
body. One moment he found himself listening to the High Minister's words with
hope and longing for the green Earth again; then he would be seized with a
dizzying sensation of dark emptiness and a fierce hate for all humans. His upright
posture suddenly seemed unnatural; he stumbled forward to his knees as the
voice of the High Minister, recorded thousands of years earlier, rose to an
impassioned climax. He began to beat the stump of his left arm against the edge
of an instrument console. The heavy protective suit seemed to be crushing the
breath out of his body; he felt something within him instinctively struggling to
break out as if from a shell. His alien hand hissed and crackled...

'... and so, across the chasm of the years, I send to you the hopes of all
Humanity for a safe landing... safe landing... safe landing...'

The High Minister's words became an exuberant refrain in Noah's ears. He
crawled across to the opening which connected the two chambers of the Control
Centre, intent on vengeance against the hated Humans. He raised the paralysator,
still gripped in his right hand, and directed the relentless pulses of energy at the
body of the young Medtech until it had completely disintegrated into nothing.
Then the weapon clattered from his grasp as Noah's human awareness gained
supremacy again.

He backed into the smaller chamber, his mind struggling to overcome the
urge of his injured left hand to wreck the Cryogenic Systems Panel. The arm
seemed to have an existence of its own, independent of his control. As he stared



at it, the sleeve suddenly split wide open, spilling out a stream of viscous matter
which rapidly hardened into a glistening, cellular tissue.

It was the flesh of a Wirrrn...



5 The Wirrrn

The Doctor and his companions stood silently as the serene voice of the
High Minister flooded the Cryogenic Chamber. Vira had ascended to the second
level of pallets, where the multiple humming of the Revivification process was
increasing little by little as the occupants were brought gradually back to life.
The Doctor had been squatting thoughtfully beside the crumbling remains of the
corpse, poking about the exposed viscera of the alien creature. Harry and Sarah
had been detailed to search for more of the trails left by the larvae, and to check
for any other-empty pallets where the creature may have laid its eggs.

'Sort of pre-match pep talk,' whispered Harry, as the High Minister drew
towards the end of her message. Sarah was listening in rapt attention; she had
heard the mysterious voice before, but where? Vira gazed slowly round at the
ranks of her people. She could not understand what had happened to Noah, why
he had ordered Revivification to cease. As she listened to the High Minister, she
was filled with a renewed sense of her great mission.

The High Minister's voice was brutally interrupted by a harsh, grating
whisper which broke into sudden shrieks and gasps, becoming incoherent and
then lucid again. '... Vira... Vira... Hear me... Expedite Revivification... Initiate
the Main Phase now...'

Vira looked utterly bewildered. 'Noah... Commander,' she cried, 'I do not
understand...'

'We... you are in danger... Take our... your people to Earth before they...
before we...' Noah's voice became a distorted roaring. Vira turned from side to
side, staring into the dark upper reaches of the chamber as if seeking Noah there.
'They... We are here... in the Terra Nova,' the rasping whisper continued. 'We
shall absorb the humans... the new Earth will be ours...'

Vira covered her face, rocking herself to and fro in terrified
incomprehension.

'We are in... Wirrrn my mind... no time... Libri is dead... the Wirrrn will
absorb... Wirrrn will absorb the humans...' The hoarse whisper of Noah's threat
reverberated for some time. Then silence fell over the vast chamber.

It was broken at last by the Doctor. 'The Wirrrn... Wirrrn... endo-
parasitism... multi-cellular larvae...' he muttered, as if trying to recall something
from the depths of his colossal, encyclopaedic memory.

'Does that mean they'll literally eat us alive?' shuddered Sarah.
The Doctor nodded gravely. He swept his long arm in a broad gesture round

the Cryogenic Chamber. 'The Revivification process is much too slow,' he
warned. 'If we do not destroy the Wirrrn larvae before they develop into pupae
—none of us will survive.' He crossed the chamber to the base of the elevator
shaft, where Vira lingered uncertainly. He took her gently by the arm. 'If we can
confront Noah in time—while he still retains some vestige of his humanity—we
may be able to discover a way of fighting the Wirrrn. Come.'

Vira held back. 'I cannot leave until the last of the Technop Personnel have
safely revived,' she protested.



The Doctor looked earnestly into her face. 'You are the only one of us that
Noah—or what is left of Noah—will trust. You must come with me—for the
sake of your people.'

The Doctor quickly persuaded Harry that he had observed enough of the
Revivification Process to take over from Vira for a short time, with Sarah's
assistance, of course. Then he led Vira firmly out through the Access Chamber
in pursuit of Noah.

As they were whisked along the Access Tunnel on the conveyor, the Doctor
outlined his theory. 'I postulate a multi-nucleate organism with a shared
consciousness,' he concluded. 'The larvae clustered in the Solar Chamber in order
to pupate and we—first myself, then Noah—disturbed them.' They had reached
the Decontamination Airlock which sealed off the Cryogenic Sector. As the
shutter opened they came face to facewithNoah. Hewas hunched in the confined
space of the cubicle, still wearing the white radiation suit which was now split
open down the entire left side and oozing the green, treacly bubbles of the
parasite larvae. Choking fumes from the smouldering suit curled around him.

Conquering her fear and revulsion, Vira stepped towards her Commander
with outstretched arms.

'Do not touch me,' Noah rasped. His face was turned away from them, but
he covered them with the paralysator.

The Doctor seized Vira's arm and pulled her behind him. He then spoke
rapidly to Noah. 'Tell us one thing, Noah. How much time do we have?'

Slowly Noah turned his head fully towards them. The whole of the left
side of his face was transformed into a shapeless, suppurating mass of glistening
green tissue, in the midst of which his eye rolled like an enormous shelled egg.
As they stared at him horrified they could almost detect the spreading movement
of the alien skin.

'It... it feels near... very near... now,' he croaked. As he tried to speak, a ball
of crackling mucus welled out of the dark slit that was his mouth and trickled
down the front of the suit. He stumbled forward. 'Vira... Vira...' He threw the
paralysator at Vira's feet. 'For pity's sake... kill me... kill me now,' he pleaded,
his voice barely intelligible. Then he reeled back with an appalling shriek into
the airlock as, with a crack like a gigantic seed pod bursting, his whole head split
open and a fountain of green froth erupted and ran sizzling down the radiation
suit, burning deep trenches in the thick material. The shutter closed.

Vira stared at the closed panel, pale and shaking. 'I am sorry,' she said at
last. 'I showed weakness.'

'No, I could not have done it either,' said the Doctor, picking up the weapon.
'Come, there is little time.'

For a moment Vira did not move. 'Noah... Noah and I were pair-bonded for
the new life,' she said. Her eyes were full of tears. The Doctor gently led her
away, back down the Access Tunnel to the Cryogenic Chamber.

Much to their own surprise, Harry and Sarah had successfully supervised
the revival of two Technops: Lycett and Rogin. At first dazed and suspicious,
the technicians had soon revealed themselves to be almost friendly after Harry's
and Sarah's breathless explanations. They were much less formal than Vira had
been, and Rogin did not seem too surprised that things had gone wrong.



'We should have taken our chance in the Therm Shelters, and stayed on
Terra Firma,' he said wistfully.

'Howmuch Anatomy do you remember, Harry?' the Doctor cried, sweeping
into the Cryogenic Chamber and going straight over to the corpse of the Wirrrn
Queen.

'Quite a bit, I hope,' said Harry, joining him. 'But you'd need an
Entomologist for that thing.'

Vira greeted the two Technops with obvious relief, glad to have the
company of her own people again. 'We will commence Main Phase at once,' she
ordered, leading them to the Access Chamber Control Suite.

'But the safety procedures...' protested Lycett, shocked.
'We shall override them,' said Vira. 'I am Commander now, it is my

decision. Take your operating stations.'
'Curious lung structure,' remarked Harry as he watched the Doctor probe

through the remains of the Wliiin Queen for some clue as to its origin and
possible weaknesses.

'A superb adaptation,' the Doctor agreed. 'Its lungs recycle the creature's
wastes... almost certainly by enzymes of some kind... carbon dioxide back to
oxygen...'

'Like plants,' suggested Sarah, craning to see.
The Doctor turned his attention to the huge head. 'Exactly, Sarah... It seems

capable of existing in Space, just occasionally visiting a planetary atmosphere
for food and oxygen.'

'The way a whale rises to the surface...' Sarah added.
The Doctor was staring at the Wirrrn's gigantic yellow eye. Suddenly he

leaped to his feet and rushed through into the Access Chamber, where Vira and
the two Technops were initiating the Main Phase.

'Wait,' he shouted. 'The Main Phase must wait.'
Vira turned to the Doctor in astonishment. 'But Noah said we should

expedite Revivification and get our people to Earth '
The Doctor waved his arms impatiently. 'The process is much too slow,' he

cried. 'The Wirrrn larvae will have pupated to imago long before the last of your
people are fully revived. We may have only hours before the Wirrrn overrun the
Satellite.'

Vira looked defiantly at the Doctor. She seemed to have regained her former
cold authority. 'You have an alternative plan?' she challenged.

'The larvae must be entering the pupal stage now,' explained the Doctor.
'Before they develop into adult Wirrrn form, they will be relatively dormant. If
we can only discover their weakness we may be able to destroy them. I wonder...

'I need everyone's assistance,' he suddenly shouted, bolting back into the
Cryogenic Chamber. For a moment nobody moved. Sarah's face lit up in
anticipation as she realised the Doctor was about to launch one of his improvised
experiments. For the next five minutes the Doctor rushed from one chamber to
the other, issuing rapid instructions. Harry was persuaded to try his surgical skills
in removing a section of the Wirrrn Queen's giant brain.

Vira reluctantly ordered Rogin and Lycett to abandon the Main Phase
procedure. At first they resisted, but they grew more and more co-operative as



they realised the extent of the Doctor's knowledge. They agreed to assist him in
rigging up a Neural Amplification System...

After an hour of frenzied activity, the Doctor made the final adjustments to
his 'apparatus'; what looked like a lengthy piece of crochet, made out of yards
of cable and connectors, hung from one of the Access Chamber Video Cabinets.
Several wires stretched from the incredible tangle across to a large segment of
the. Wirrrn's brain tissue. The electrode terminals on the ends of the wires were
inserted into various parts of the gelatinous grey substance.

Vira had stood apart from the others, looking on suspiciously while they
worked. 'What are you attempting to do?' she asked sceptically as the Doctor
completed his adjustments.

'In certain kinds of tissue, neural impressions can sometimes be revived by
carefully controlled stimulus...' began the Doctor.

'I've never heard of that,' Harry interrupted, frowning.
'Yes, there were theories,' said Vira in a cold, clinical voice. 'But our

research was in its infancy when the Earth had to be evacuated.'
The Doctor grinned mischievously. 'Well, you see I have something of a

head start in such matters.' He winked at Sarah, who winked back.
'Gypsies used to believe that the eye retained its last image after death,' she

said. Vira stared at her impassively.
'Anyway, here goes,' said the Doctor; signalling to Rogin to switch in the

video unit and the amplifier lash-up. 'It should at least give us an idea of the
Wirrrn Queen's last moments.'

The video screenwas at oncemottledwithwhite flashes of static.With great
care the Doctor altered the positions of the electrode probes inserted into the
Wirrrn's brain tissue. The screen showed nothing but dizzy zig-zag patterns as
the Doctor connected different areas of theWirrrn Queen's brain to his 'machine'.
He sighed with disappointment.

'It's no good,' he muttered. 'The neuron matrix isn't sensitive enough. It isn't
going to work.' The Doctor stared sadly at his 'crochetwork', his chin sunk on
his chest.

'I am going to link in my own brain,' he announced suddenly.
Vira immediately stepped forward. 'I cannot allow it,' she cried. 'The power

could burn out a living brain.' But the Doctor was already rummaging about
among the circuitry.

'An ordinary brain, I agree,' came his muffled voice from inside the video
cabinet 'But mine is rather exceptional.' He grinned over his shoulder before
ducking back in again.

'Doctor, it's an appallingly dangerous idea,' Harry objected.
The Doctor stood up. 'It's the only way,' he said.
The others watched apprehensively as Rogin and Lycett attached electrodes

to the Doctor's temples, and connected the wires into the maze inside the cabinet
and to the probes stuck into the Wirrrn brain. The Doctor pointed to the video
cabinet, to the brain tissue, and then to his own head. 'Piggy in the middle,' he
smiled.

Sarah shuddered. 'Do you have to do this, Doctor?' she pleaded.
Vira moved between the two Technops and the equipment. 'I forbid this,'

she said. But Rogin and Lycett seemed to be fascinated by the Doctor's plan.



The Doctor gestured towards the Cryogenic Chamber, humming faintly in
the background. 'The outcome of this experiment may save the Human Race,' he
said. 'If it fails, then at least only the six of us will suffer.' He settled himself into
one of the control console seats. 'It may be a trifle irrational of me,' he smiled,
'but humans are quite my favourite species.' Then his face grew deadly serious.
'Tie me to the chair,' he ordered.

The Doctor was soon secured to the seat with a variety of complicated
nautical knots tied by Harry in the thick insulated wire. The Doctor told Vira
to take the paralysator from his pocket. 'Do not hesitate to destroy me should
anything go wrong.' Sarah looked at Harry in horror as Vira took the weapon
without a word.

'Switch on,' said the Doctor. Lycett and Rogin operated a sequence of
buttons. The Doctor's body shook and then arched sharply over the back of the
seat. His eyes bulged out of their sockets, his mouth gaped, and he uttered a
chilling gasp. Then he slumped heavily forward.

Vira moved closer to Harry and Sarah. 'He is joining his mind to the
Wirrrn's,' she murmured. 'If the experiment works, he may remain part of the
Wirrrn's consciousness for ever.'

Following the Doctor's instructions, Sarah and Harry, each holding an
insulated electrode, systematically probed the lump of jelly-like matter from the
Wirrrn's brain. Occasionally, the Doctor's limbs jerked; his head snapped
suddenly upright, then lolled forward again on to his chest. On the video screen
the flashes of static began to form vague shapes which dispersed and re-formed
rapidly, as if some image was trying to establish itself. Sarah and Harry forced
themselves to continue, despite the Doctor's agonized gasps and spasms as they
moved the electrodes.

Rogin suddenly pointed to the screen. 'Look,' he cried. 'It is working.'
A faint, ghostly outline was steadily resolving into a clearer and clearer

picture. The Doctor uttered brief whimpering sounds, as if willing the image to
become more sharply defined.

As they watched the screen with bated breaths, they heard a distant hissing
and buzzing from the Cryogenic Chamber. Rogin and Lycett leaped to their feet.
There was a deafening noise, like the cracking of an ice floe, followed by the
sound of a damp fire crackling.

'What is that?' whispered Vira.
The two Technops rushed through into the adjacent chamber. The others

remained 'gazing at the screen where the shadowy image had sharpened into a
distinct picture of a massive Satellite revolving slowly against the heavens like
a giant spinning-top. The central hub-structure was composed of a cluster of
gigantic tubes, bristling with antennae and reflector dishes. The radial tunnels,
or spokes, which ran outwards to the great circular rim, swelled here and there
into spherical chambers and sub-structures, all interconnectedwith glinting steel-
lattice framework.

The Doctor sighed, as if with satisfaction. Sarah and Harry noticed, that he
was smiling, and rocking his head gently from side to side. On the screen the
image of the Satellite was also swinging in the same rhythm. It came steadily
closer until the whole screen was occupied by a close-up of a kind of entrance
hatch. The Doctor began to pant, as if in anticipation. Tentacles snaked into view



in the foreground of the picture and fastened themselves about the steel hand-
holds positioned round the edge of the airlock.

'Look out, Lycett, behind you...' came Rogin's sudden shriek from the
Cryogenic Chamber. Vira spun round.

'What... what is it... ?' Lycett's cry of incomprehension rose to a piercing
scream that rang through the chambers. For a second, Sarah and Harry stood
transfixed as Lycett's cries of agony combined with the Doctor's strange moans
into a grotesque medley of sounds. Then Harry sprang to life and rushed through
into the Cryogenic Chamber. He caught a momentary glimpse of the glistening,
bubbling creature he had seen before in the gallery. As it rolled in a great hissing
ball towards him, he collided with Rogin who hurled him back into the Access
Chamber and swiftly operated the shutter control. As the panel glided shut, they
all watched the heaving, crackling mass wobbling across the floor towards the
narrowing gap. The panel closed just in time.

'Lycett's been absorbed by the larvae...' screamed Rogin.
Harry dived for the video console. 'Stop the experiment... let's get out of

here.'
Sarah threw herself forward, barring his way. 'No, Harry... you could kill

the Doctor if you interfere with the circuits,' she cried.
Vira gave orders in a clear, firm voice. 'Rogin: the Armoury. Bring the Laser

Lances.' Rogin ran out into the Access Tunnel. Vira turned to Harry who was
anxiously eyeing the grilled duct-openings set high in the walls of the Access
Chamber; he knew that at any moment the larvae might burst in upon them. 'Go
with Rogin,' she commanded. Harry glanced inquiringly at Sarah. She hesitated,
then nodded.

'Good luck, Harry,' she said.
'And to you, old girl,' he replied, spinning round and out in pursuit of Rogin.
As the panel closed behind Harry, Sarah looked back to the video screen.

The Doctor had grown strangely silent, and on the screen a blurred and bulbous
image of the Control Centre had appeared. The image swung up and down, and
from side to side, as if showing the view through the eyes of something which
was moving slowly and awkwardly about the chamber. Suddenly, the screen
whitened with a blinding glare. The image of the Control Centre reeled wildly
about. Burst after burst flashed over the screen.

The Doctor began to struggle violently, fighting against the tight loops of
wire which bound him to the chair, his face folded in pain. In the foreground of
the picture, Sarah and Vira saw a blur of tentacle shapes flourishing defiantly.
Sarah glanced from the screen to the Doctor's thrashing limbs; then she stared at
the inert lump of the Wirrrn's brain tissue.

'It's the Wirrrn Queen...' she gasped in horror, pointing to the video screen.
The Doctor uttered terrifying cries as, on the screen, the Electronic Guard

discharged its lethal bolts at the Wirrrn Queen, which was now fighting its way
into the second Control Chamber... showing them all exactly what had happened
in reality. Once again, the Doctor began to breathe in hoarse panting sounds; his
head nodded eagerly, and his hands made rapid gripping movements in the air.
As they watched, Sarah and Vira saw the tentacles come into view again; they
began prising open a section of control panelling. Thick bundles of cables were
ripped from their mountings. The Doctor's body became hunched, his jaw tensed



open. Then, with a grotesque growling noise, he snapped his teeth shut; on the
screen, severed cable-ends flew in all directions. Then the picture dissolved into
static.

Sarah felt Vira's hand grip her arm sharply. She had heard it too, a distant
cracklinglike a bonfire at the end of a long tunnel. They stared up at the vents...

Harry and Rogin emerged from the Armoury carrying short, rifle-like
objects with dish-shaped shields fitted round the barrels. As they raced round the
Cincture Structure Gallery, Rogin explained to Harry how to operate the deadly
laser guns. They had to pass through the junction section where the Access
Tunnel to the Solar Chambers joined the curved gallery of the Cincture Structure.
As the shutter opened, they found themselves facing a monstrous apparition.
Noah, his back hunched menacingly, glared at them with the huge ochre-
coloured eye which occupied the whole of the left side of his head. The entire
left side of his body had swollen and burst through the radiation suit, and the skin
was hard and polished. In place of his left arm, three stumpy tentacles thrashed
about, centimetres from their faces.

'Human fools... ' Noah's hideous croaking made the hair rise on Harry's
neck. Rogin fired his laser lance at pointblank range, cutting a deep trench in
Noah's glossy, shell-like body. Noah reeled back against an observation port in
the outer wall of the gallery. Pressing themselves to the inner wall, Harry and
Rogin inched their way through the bulkhead panel, their weapons scoring a
macabre criss-cross pattern in Noah's side. They managed to slip past him, just
out of reach of the knife-like hairs bristling over the jabbing tentacles.

'You... cannot... stop us...' Noah croaked, turning his head as the panel began
to close between them. Rogin gasped, and stopped firing as he glimpsed the still
recognisable features of his Commander staring at him in agony. Then he fired
a last burst of laser as the shutter slid home.

For a few seconds, Sarah and Vira had forgotten the Doctor as they stared
fearfully up at the wall vents of the Access Chamber; the crackling sounds were
growing louder every second, and the closed panel into the Cryogenic Chamber
was beginning to vibrate like a drumskin, as if something was beating violently
on the other side. Then Vira suddenly gestured in horror at the video screen.
'Dune...' she gasped. '... Technop Dune...' On the screen Sarah saw the image
of a young man, dressed in the Tech Personnel uniform, lying helplessly in his
pallet. The image came nearer and nearer. Tentacles reached out and opened the
pallet shield.

Sarah struggled to calm the Doctor. His face was running with sweat and
his teeth were chattering. He began to moan over and over again.

'... Wirrrn... Wirrrnwirrrn... the... Wirrrn...' Sarah tore the electrodes from
the Doctor's head and tugged feebly at the tight knots securing him. She turned
to Vira.

'Help me with him,' she implored.
Vira was staring at the blank screen. 'That... that was Dune,' she whispered,

her voice filled with shock and outrage. She looked at the Doctor's shuddering
body. 'Stand away,' she ordered Sarah, who glanced up to see her levelling the
paralysator directly at the Doctor.

'No... No, you can't...' she screamed at Vira.



'Stand away,' repeated Vira. 'The Doctor's mind has been possessed by the
Wirrrn. He must be eliminated.'

Sarah threw herself at Vira and tried to wrest the weapon from her strong
fingers. They struggled desperately while the Doctor remained slumped in his
chair, moaning quietly as if in a trance.

'Wirrrn... wirrrnwirr...'
Then, from one of the grille-covered ducts above them, there erupted a mass

of crackling froth. Sarah shrank down behind the Doctor's motionless body; Vira
fired the paralysator at the gathering ball of larvae quivering over them. The
weapon had no effect.

Sarah screamed in the Doctor's ear. 'Doctor, please help us... help us,
Doctor...' as the crackling grew to a deafening pitch all around them. The panel
sealing off the Cryogenic Chamber began to warp and shudder; round its tightly
fitting edges the larvae were oozing slowly through. Vira backed away, covering
Sarah and the Doctor, and firing the useless paralysator at the apparently
indestructible 'creature'.

'The panel is failing,' Vira cried. The shutter folded up like melted plastic. In
the entrance to the Cryogenic Chamber there hung a sizzling curtain of globules,
all bursting and multiplying. Whiplash tentacles formed out of the undulating
mass and flew towards them...



6 Time Running Out

Harry and Rogin rushed into the Access Chamber just in time to slice
through the fronds of larvae with the laser guns. The smouldering fragments
stuck like dried glue to the floor, centimetres from Vira's feet. Raking the
clustering larvae with the silent and invisible laser beams, they disintegrated
the globules as easily as if they were cutting through snow with jets of water.
The chamber was soon filled with a choking and sickening smoke. At once the
larvae began to retreat through the ducts; the nightmarish curtain hanging in the
entrance to the Cryogenic Chamber shrank away. Harry and Rogin advanced,
forcing the larvae back.

The Doctor stood up, effortlessly snapping the wires that had confined him.
He began to lurch towards the retreating larvae with outstretched arms.

'Doctor... Doctor, come back,' screamed Sarah, but the Doctor stumbled
heedlessly forward as if obeying some primitive instinct.

'Get back, Doctor,' shouted Harry as the Doctor crossed into his line of
fire. A corner of the Doctor's jacket was sliced off by Harry's laser and fell in a
smouldering spiral. Sarah had dived forward and she brought the Doctor down
with an unorthodox but effective rugger tackle. He fell with a crash.

'Bravo, old girl,' yelled Harry, as he and Rogin leaped over the Doctor's
prone body in pursuit of the straggling remains of the Wirrrn larvae, rapidly
retreating into the Cryogenic Chamber.

For a few seconds, the Doctor lay quite still. Sarah bent over him anxiously.
Vira was covering him with the paralysator. Suddenly he leaped abruptly to his
feet: 'Good morning, Sarah. Is it time to get up?' he asked brightly.

Sarah hugged the Doctor, tears of relief in her eyes. 'Doctor you... you were
nearly...' she stammered, scarcely able to speak.

The Doctor patted her on the head abstractedly, and seated himself
comfortably at the control console. He took out the scorched bag of jelly-babies
from his damaged pocket, prised one from the congealed mass, popped it into
his mouth and offered the bag absently to Sarah. 'Breakfast?' he asked.

Sarah shook her head. 'No thanks,' she grimaced. 'They remindme toomuch
of that larvae stuff.'

The Doctor stared at the shapeless lump of melted sweets. 'Why don't they
wait?' he murmured to himself. 'In their adult form the Wirrrn will be far
deadlier.'

'How many of them will there be?' said Vira. She had lowered the
paralysator, but she watched the Doctor warily, still unsure of what effect the
experiment might have had on him.

The Doctor chewed away thoughtfully. 'At a hatching... perhaps a
hundred... possibly a thousand,' he said quietly. Just then, Harry and Rogin
backed into the Access Chamber, covering the entrance to the Cryogenic
Chamber which was once again humming gently to itself.

'We'll be ready for them,' Harry said grimly, obviously elated by their
spectacular victory with the laser guns.



The Doctor shook his head. 'The lances will be virtually useless against a
swarm of fully mature Wirrrn,' he warned.

'Then how can we fight them?' said Sarah at last.
The Doctor glanced at the lump ofWirrrn brain, bristling with electrodes on

the control console beside him. 'Electricity of course,' he shouted. 'I remember
now—it was the electromagnetic OMDSS that killed me... I mean the Wirrrn
Queen,' he added hastily, noticing the paralysator still firmly gripped in Vira's
hand.

'Yes, we saw.' Sarah pointed to the video screen.
'And you were correct, Doctor,' said Vira. 'Technop Dune was the host for

the Wirrrn eggs. We saw that too.'
'But how did the Wirrrn Queen get into the Cryogenic Chamber?' asked

Harry, shuddering at the recollection of the dead creature toppling out on him.
'The most tenacious willpower,' replied the Doctor. 'I could feel it fighting

off death until it had spawned; until its task was completed.'
He stood up, stuffing the sweets back into his coat. 'We must, get back

to the Control Centre,' he said. 'There should be some way of electrifying the
Infrastructure and the Solar Chamber from there.' He strode towards the entrance
to the Access Tunnel.

'Noah's out there,' Harry cried, barring the Doctor's way. He quickly related
their recent encounter with Noah.

The Doctor slapped his forehead. 'Of course,' he said. ' That'swhy the larvae
emerged now ; they can bypass the pupal stage by taking over fully conscious
living tissue—like Noah's body. That way they can accelerate the transformation
intomatureWirrrn form.' He glanced towards the Cryogenic Chamber. The panel
lay buckled beside the entrance. 'We'vewon a breathing space, but we're trapped.'
His eyes roved around the Access Chamber, seeking inspiration. 'We've got to
reach the Control Centre.'

The Doctor's darting gaze lighted on the Matter Transmitter Couch. He
smiled at his companions. 'Now that little gadget can be made to go backwards.'

Rogin shook his head. 'To reverse the polarities would take us hours,
Doctor,' he objected. 'There just is not time.'

The Doctor tapped the side of his head. 'It so happens that I have a few
short-cut methods of my own,' he said, diving under the control console of the
Matter Transmitter.

Rogin looked round unhappily at the others. 'But if there should be the
slightest error...' he began.

'Take your choice,' came the Doctor's muffled interruption. '... If this little
trick fails, we shall either be gobbled up by the Wirrrn, or dispersed particle
by particle into infinity. And I know which of the two fates I should prefer,' he
added, re-emerging from beneath the console and touching a switch.

The transparent shroud covering the couch slid smoothly aside. The Doctor
motioned Rogin to climb on to it. 'After you,' he smiled. With a moment's
hesitation and a reluctant nod of assent from Vira, Rogin gripped his laser gun
firmly and lay down on the couch. The shroud slid shut. The Doctor pressed a
series of switches; Rogin faded to a ghostly outline and then disappeared. Harry's
eyes were almost popping out of his head.



'You next, Harry,' said the Doctor. In a daze Harry obeyed. He too faded
and disappeared. As Sarah took her turn, the Doctor muttered confidentially to
her, 'Sarah, I'm so relieved—I was not at all sure it would work.'

Sarah smiled nervously. 'Here I go again,' she called as the shroud closed
over her.

The Doctor operated the switches; Sarah became a ghost for a moment and
then returned to flesh and blood reality. Through the transparent shroud she
grimaced at the Doctor. He smiled apologetically and tried again. Sarah faded a
second time and instantly reappeared.

At the same moment, the lights in the Access Chamber flickered and sank
to a mere glimmer. Rogin's voice crackled feebly over the intercom from the
Control Centre. 'Commander, we have a power fade in Section Three.'

Vira pointed to a warning display on a nearby console. 'The Oxygen System
has ceased operation,' she murmured.

The Doctor beat his fists together in frustration. 'We're so helpless in here,'
he cried. 'If we could only dispose of Noah we might have a chance of tackling
the larvae while they are still in the chrysalis stage—assuming that they are by
now.' He glanced up at the vents. An urgent tapping reminded him that Sarah
was still trapped in the Matter Transmitter Couch at his side.

'Obviously I'm not going anywhere,' she scowled as the Doctor released her.
'Where are you going though?' she demanded as the Doctor suddenly whirled
round and made for the Access Tunnel.

'I shan't be long,' he called. 'Lock the door behind me—and don't let any
one or any thing in.'

'Doctor,' Sarah shouted vainly after him, 'Noah is out there and you...'
But he was gone.
Every nerve taut, his senses as sharp as those of a wild beast stalking its

prey, the Doctor sped through the dark, empty tunnels. At any moment he might
encounter Noah or the larvae, and he had no weapon with which to defend
himself. Although Sarah and Vira were armed with the paralysator and with a
laser lance, he knew they were in terrible danger every moment he was away
from the Access Chamber.

He soon reached the Radiation Shield leading into the Solar Chamber. The
shattered helmet belonging to Noah's protective suit still lay where it had fallen.
With great care the Doctor opened the Shield and stepped warily into the Solar
Chamber. At first he thought the chamber was deserted. He was about to switch
on the torch to make sure, when he suddenly noticed that clinging to the softly
glowing reservoirs of the upper levels were huge, ovoid crystalline objects. 'The
pupal stage...' he breathed, peering up into the gloom. Every fibre alert, he
advanced up the steel ladder to the first level of reservoirs. The Wirrrn pupae
were transparent—like huge lumps of clouded glass—inside which the skeletal
form of the adult Wirrrn was clearly visible, pulsating rhythmically like a
heartbeat.

Stealthily the Doctor approached the broad centre shaft which contained the
Solar Chamber systems controls and displays. He found the Section Three panel
open, its interior totally wrecked. He set to work to try and salvage the oxygen
supply circuits, at the same time forming in his mind a scheme to electrify the
Solar Chamber and thus prevent the adult Wirrrn from breaking out once they



reached the imago stage. An occasional sharp splitting sound came from the
massed pupae above him, and the chamber was filled with subdued rustlings and
movements as the Wirrrn chrysali absorbed energy from the globes.

A shrill rattle, like the sound of a giant cicada, made the Doctor spin round.
A Wirrrn hovered over him, scraps of radiation suit still clinging to its body.

'Noah,' gasped the Doctor, pressing himself against the exposed circuits.
The eerie rattling was made by the rows of scythe-like hairs rubbing together.
The Wirrrn turned first one, then the other of its huge eyes towards him. Then,
with a sudden contortion of its segmented body, it brought its tail up and over its
head so that the murderous claw hung above the Doctor like the sting of a giant
scorpion. The shrill rattling reached a climax as the claw opened. The creature
seemed to purr with triumph, uttering its own name. 'Wirrrrrrrrrrrrrrrn...'

The vicious claw swung down at the Doctor's throat.
Suddenly a series of deep lines was scored across the underbelly of the

rearing Wirrrn. It turned from the Doctor to face the attack. From somewhere
below him, the Doctor heard Sarah screaming. 'Run, Doctor. Run...' He threw
himself between the creature's razor-bristling legs and rolled across the steel
landing. He glimpsed the terrified faces of Sarah and Vira in the torch-beam.
They were pointing the paralysator and the laser lance uncertainly into the half-
light. The Doctor dived down the companionway.

'Get out. Out. Both of you,' he roared. 'The radiation in here could kill you.'
Reaching them, and grabbing them by the arms, he steered them towards the
open Shield and safety.

'Stay, Vira, stay...' The words seemed to come from the depths of the
chamber itself rather than from the hideous apparition before them. Vira twisted
free from the Doctor's grasp and turned, letting go the laser lance which fell
clattering into the darkness below them.

'Noah... Commander...' Vira cried, her voice choked with tears.
The Wirrrn moved gradually closer to them, its legs rustling like dry leaves

against the metal struts. It stopped a few metres away, crouched on the edge of
the gantry above them.

'Abandon the Satellite now... Take the Transport Vessel... If you remain
you will perish with the Sleepers....' The hushed whisper enfolded them like a
breeze. It was just recognisably the voice of Noah, but it issued from the huge
quivering mandibles of the giant insect looming over them.

Vira tried to approach a step nearer, but the Doctor held her firmly back.
'We cannot abandon the Terra Nova. You know that,' she murmured.

The creature reared up again, its tentacles bristling. 'The Wirrrn must
survive...Whenwe emerge the humans will be destroyed—just as they destroyed
us...'

'What does he mean?' whispered Sarah.
Noah reached out over them with quivering tentacles. 'Humans came to

Andromeda... For long ages the Wirrrn fought them... But they destroyed our
breeding colonies on Andromeda Gamma Epsilon...'

Vira turned to the Doctor with shining eyes. 'Then our stellar pioneers
succeeded,' she whispered.

'... Since that time theWirrrn have searched the Emptiness for new breeding
places... Now we have found an ideal habitat... The Satellite is ours...'



The Doctor edged forward a little. 'The Wirrrn inhabit the Emptiness,' he
said quietly. 'They do not need the Satellite.' Noah was poised over them like a
gigantic preying mantis.

'You know nothing,' he rasped. 'Our breeding is terrestrial—we require
hosts for our hatchings... We shall use the humans in the Cryogenic Chamber...
In one generation the Wirrrn will become an advanced technological species...
We shall...' A sharp splitting sound obliterated the rest of Noah's words. The
Doctor eased the two women slowly back towards the entrance.

'The pupae are beginning to open,' he muttered. 'It's time we were leaving.'
As he spoke there came a fusillade of splitting sounds in rapid succession.

The Wirrrn's head moved slowly from side to side, staring at them with
fathomless, glowing eyes. Its claw swung in the darkness above them. 'Leave
the Satellite, Vira... Leave now...'

Vira tried to resist the Doctor's guiding hand. 'Noah... Noah,' she faltered.
A shattering crescendo of cracks like gunfire made the Doctor whirl round

and thrust Sarah and Vira out into the tunnel. He closed the Shield manually,
and whipping out the sonic screwdriver, directed it at the locking panel for a few
seconds. 'That should scramble the works,' he said. 'They'll have to chew their
way out now.' Then he led his two companions into the pitch darkness of the
labyrinthine Satellite...

Harry stared down at the Matter Transmitter Couch in the Control Centre
where, for the past ten minutes, he had expected the others to materialise just
as he and Rogin had done. 'Something's gone wrong with this gadget,' he said
gloomily.

Rogin grunted. He was busy working on a set of systems panels he had
lifted out from the wall. He had succeeded in restoring the lighting in the Control
Chambers although it was not very bright.

Harry was irritated by the Technop's apparent lack of concern. 'Well, I do
think we ought at least to investigate,' he said.

Rogin pointed out that there was no lighting elsewhere in the Terra Nova.
'After what happened to Lycett,' he added, 'I want to see where I am treading.'

Harry glanced down at his own shoeless feet. ' You should worry,' he
muttered.

'Still no oxygen,' said Rogin, shaking his head. He stood up, and as he did
so seemed to jump a little from the floor and to be suspended for a fraction of a
second in the air. At the same moment, Harry realised that the laser lance he was
holding appeared to have become mysteriously lighter. Before he could remark
on it, there came a sudden clatter from the adjacent Control Chamber, where the
TARDIS had materialised. Rogin grabbed the lance from Harry and concealed
himself to one side of the opening into the neighbouring chamber. Harry leaped
to the other side, bouncing lightly across the floor.

'Anyone at home?' The Doctor's hat was poked through the open panel and
waved about on the end of the telescopic probe.

'Where on earth have you all been?' cried Harry as the Doctor entered,
followed by Sarah and Vira.

'We bumped into Noah,' Sarah said wryly.
'Excellent work, Rogin,' the Doctor said approvingly. 'You've managed to

shed a little bit of light on our problems.'



'I have diverted power from the Gravity Static Field, Doctor,' explained
Rogin.

'I thought I was feeling rather light-headed,' Sarah joked half-heartedly.
Rogin explained that he had not been able to restore the oxygen systems. Vira
hurried over to the Cryogenic Systems Monitor Panel. The Doctor perched on
the edge of the Transmitter Couch and silently offered round the bag of melted
jelly-babies. No one responded. He sat deep in thought.

The silence soon became unbearable.
'Perhaps we should take Noah's advice,' said Sarah.
'And what was that?' Harry asked.
'Vamoose, or stick around and be killed,' she replied.
Harry at once moved towards the entrance. 'Well I'm certainly ready to get

going,' he said eagerly. 'Why don't we all jump into the TARDIS?'
'Vira has no intention of abandoning her people, and neither have we,' the

Doctor snapped.
Sarah moved over to join Harry. 'So that settles us ,' she sighed. 'We'll just

stay here and suffocate, or freeze or be gobbled up.'
With a cry of frustration the Doctor leaped up. 'If we only had a power

source we could electrify the bulkheads of the Cryogenic Section... The Wirrrn
would never get through,' he said. '... There must be a way—even with Noah in
control of the Solar Chamber.'

At that moment, Sarah remembered something. 'Just a minute,' she cried,
'Noah said...'

Harry interrupted her. 'Perhaps we could lure Noah out of the Infrastructure
and into a trap,' he suggested.

'What do you have in mind, Harry?' the Doctor asked cuttingly. '... a
concealed trench covered with elephant grass?'

Sarah tried to gain their attention. 'Doctor, listen, I've just remembered...'
The Doctor held up his hand for silence. He turned to Rogin. 'Could we

confuse the Wirrrn by altering the Gravity Static Field?' he asked.
The Technop shook his head. 'It would take hours to trace the lines of force,'

he objected. The Doctor nodded in professional agreement.
'Will someone please listen to me?' Sarah had climbed up on to the couch

and was waving her arms frantically in the air. The Doctor rounded on her with
barely concealed annoyance.

'What is it, Sarah?' he demanded sharply.
'Noahmentioned a Transporter Vessel,' she replied. They all looked blankly

at her. 'Well, presumably it has a power system of its own...'
The Doctor clutched at his head. 'Why didn't you mention this before?' he

cried. 'I can't be expected to think of everything, you know,' he added with a
grieved expression.

Harry helped Sarah down from the couch. 'Well done, old girl,' he grinned.
The Doctor rubbed his hands together with renewed spirit. He asked Rogin

how to reach the Transport Vessel. Rogin leaned across and activated a large
display-plan of the entire Satellite. He indicated a shortened 'spoke' leading from
the Cincture Structure towards the central Infrastructure or 'hub', and ending
halfway in a circular Docking Structure where the Transport Vessel was
mounted. The Doctor studied the display closely.



'We would have to run 'cables halfway round the Cincture Structure from
the Transport Vessel to the Cryogenic Chamber,' he murmured doubtfully. 'The
Wirrrn will simply cut them.' Rogin nodded. The Doctor leaned closer to the
illuminated plan. 'What are those?' He indicated a complex of shafts and lattice
girders joining the Transporter Dock to the Central Hub where the Cryogenic
Section was housed.

Rogin shrugged. 'Obsolete structures,' he said. 'Relics of the time when the
Satellite was functioning as a research base for stellar exploration.'

The Doctor peered through his magnifying glass. 'They connect the
Transporter Dock with the Cryogenic Section,'. he said excitedly.

'It is possible,'. agreed Rogin. 'But we would require a mechanical cable-
runner; the conduits are only forty centimetres square.'

There was a silence. Vira crossed the chamber from the Cryogenic Systems
Panel. 'We must do something soon,' she murmured.

'Couldn't I take the cable through?' suggested Sarah. 'I don't take up much
room.'

'That's no job for you, Sarah,' Harry said firmly.
Sarah flushed with indignation. 'Now look here, Doctor Sullivan...' she

began.
The Doctor held out a length of his scarf in front of him, and moving his

hands apart, he counted off the coloured stripes. 'There: forty centimetres,' he
said, looking earnestly at Sarah. '... Do you think you could crawl through a shaft
only this wide?'

Sarah looked at the short length of scarf stretched between the Doctor's
hands, and then glanced round at the others with a cool, determined air. If she
was having second thoughts she was certainly not going to admit it. 'Of course I
could,' she declared firmly. The Doctor was full of admiration for her courage,
but he looked worried. He explained that there would be very little air or heat
in the shafts, and that Sarah would have no shielding against cosmic radiation
from Space. He also warned her that there would probably be many dead-ends
and confusing junctions.

There was a short silence. Harry was looking apprehensively at Sarah and
shaking his head. That was enough for Sarah; she thrust her chin defiantly
forward. 'Well, what are we waiting for?' she cried. 'We'd better get started at
once.'

The Doctor hesitated a moment, then he patted her shoulder and nodded.
'Splendid, Miss Smith,' he said. 'At last—an assignment worthy of your talents...'

They swiftly made their way from the Control Centre to the great wheel-
shaped Cincture Structure, the Doctor's torch playing eerily over the polished
walls of the tunnels. Everywhere was dark, silent and airless. The immobilised
shutters were opened by means of small electronic master keys carried by Rogin
and Vira. The curved gallery of the Cincture Structure was dimly lit by the
glimmering stars shining through the observation portals. In every shadowed
alcove and corner they expected to find the Wirrrn waiting for them; but the
Satellite appeared deserted. Here and there the torch picked out the silver tracks
of the Wirrrn larvae, and Sarah shuddered when they came upon blackened
scraps of Noah's protective suit littering the gallery floor.



When they reached the junction with the Cryogenic Access Tunnel, the
Doctor parted company with the others. Giving the thumbs-up sign to Sarah, he
entered the Decontamination Airlock. 'It shouldn't take me long to wire up the
Cryogenic Chamber,' he whispered. 'I'll be ready by the time you bring the cable
through, Sarah. Good luck, everyone.' The Doctor waved, and disappeared.

Rogin led Sarah, Harry and Vira further on round the Cincture Structure
towards the Transporter Dock Access Tunnel... They all knew that Sarah was
about to risk her life in an appallingly dangerous mission. Sarah herself knew
that for a journalist it was the scoop of a lifetime; but above all else in her mind
was the realisation that the future of the entire human race might now depend
upon her success...



7 A Tight Squeeze

In the centre of the Solar Chamber hovered Noah, awaiting the final
metamorphosis of the Wirrrn creatures. The chamber was seething with
nightmarish activity as the pupae began to split asunder to allow the emergence
of the fully developed Wirrrn. First, the transparent crystalline pods became
clouded and opaque as billions of tiny fissures burst through the brittle, resinous
tissue. Then the pods began to disintegrate and flake apart as the creatures within
pushed their tentacles through, sawing their way out with the sharp, bristling
hairs. Unearthly shrieks and whistlings echoed round the chamber as the adult
Wirrrn struggled to shed their crumbling pupal form. In the midst of the upheaval
Noah was poised, with raised antennae, to establish himself as swarm leader...

Rogin and his party reached the Dock Section safely. They entered, through
a complex of airlocks, into a dish-shaped area about thirty metres across.
Enormous bell-shaped nozzles hung overhead, and the cradle supporting the
Transport Vessel enclosed the humans in a thicket of light steel struts. The
Transporter itself towered invisibly above them. Rogin at once began to clamber
up one of the support struts towards a small maintenance hatch set in the
underside of the Transporter. He carried one end of a heavy high-tension cable
from a vast coil that he and Harry had manhandled from an equipment bay.

Vira led Sarah over to a series of small sealed openings in the side of the
'dish' area. She opened several of them with the electronic master key, and
directed a powerful microlamp into the dark conduits. 'This one might be
possible.' She motioned Sarah to look. The shaft was just sufficiently wide to
accommodate Sarah's hunched shoulders.

'It's awfully narrow, old girl,' muttered Harry; peering into the icy darkness.
'... If you take a wrong turning, I doubt whether you'll be able to turn back.'

Sarah smiled bravely. 'Then I'll just have to make sure that I don't, won't I?'
Vira helped Sarah to fit a tiny two-way communicator, designed rather like

a hearing aid with microphone attached, into her ear. Harry unravelled the other
end of the cable that Rogin was busy connecting into the Transporter's
generators, and secured it tightly round Sarah's waist with a complicated nautical
knot.

'Well, it would be an awful bore if it came undone,' he said, as Sarah tugged
frantically at the loop of cable to gain a little room to breathe.

'Let's hope it's long enough,' she gasped. Vira quickly explained to Sarah
how she would be guided through the conduits by radio from the Transporter
Control Deck. She clasped Sarah's hand in a brief gesture of good luck and
clambered up to join Rogin in the Transporter Vessel...

When all was ready, Harry assisted Sarah as she squeezed herself into the
conduit, and began to pay out the cable as she inched her way into the darkness.
After a few metres, the cable stopped moving. Harry poked his head into the
narrow opening. 'How are you doing, Sarah?' he called.

'... 've harly go starhed yet...' came the muffled reply.



'Sorry, old girl. I thought you were stuck,' Harry shouted. At once the cable
was jerked sharply out of his hands. Harry smiled to himself.

'Jolly good luck, old thing,' he murmured.
In the Cryogenic Chamber the Doctor was well advanced with the task of

welding cable terminals to the wall sections of the huge vault. All around him,
the sleeping survivors of a terrestrial catastrophe lay suspended between life and
death, the delicate Revivification systems starved of vital power, and the threat of
the rapidly developingWirrrn hanging over them. If Sarah succeeded in reaching
the Cryogenic Chamber with the power cable, then there was a good chance of
not only preventing the Wirrrn from invading the chamber, but also of restoring
power to the chamber's vital systems.

Suddenly the Doctor switched off the torch and thrust the sonic screwdriver
back into his pocket. He stood quite still, barely breathing, listening intently.
There was a faint, dry rustling sound; then silence. He peered into the darkness.
In the direction of the Access Chamber he saw two huge, ochre globes swinging
from side to side: the eyes of a Wirrrn. He backed stealthily away until he felt
the outline of a pallet behind him. Without taking his eyes from the baleful stare
of the creature he opened the shield. To his relief he found that the pallet was
empty. He climbed inside and closed the shield. He lay motionless, straining his
eyes to see through the thick; distorting material...

The Wirrrn moved slowly round the perimeter of the chamber, apparently
pausing to examine some of the pallets. Eventually it approached and stopped
in front of the Doctor, turning first one and then the other eye towards him. The
Doctor started, just managing to suppress a cry, as something rattled and scraped
against the pallet shield. He blinked the sweat out of his eyes, and fought against
the painful cramp caused by his keeping utterly still in such an awkward posture.
The Wirrrn seemed to stare in at him for an eternity, its sharp spines scratching
against the shield with a noise that set his teeth on edge. Then abruptly it turned
away, and crawled across the chamber towards the remains of theWirrrn Queen.
The Doctor pressed his face against the pallet shield. He could just make out the
faint image of the Wirrrn's eyes as the creature whirled in a frenzy away from
the huge corpse of its progenitor, and disappeared whence it had come.

The Doctor waited for a few minutes, then quietly raised the shield and
climbed out of the pallet...

AsHarry clambered laboriously into the ControlModule of the Transporter,
he overheard Rogin speaking quietly to Vira. '... everything is perfect,
Commander. We could depart for Earth now. There is nothing to stop us...'

'I say, just a minute...' said Harry suspiciously, easing himself up into the
small, cramped chamber. Rogin and Vira were seated in moving, padded chairs
which slid along and revolved around a slim steel pillar running the length of the
cylindrical chamber, thus allowing the occupants to reach all parts of the control
panelling.

'Generator Manual Overrides linked, Commander,' announced Rogin,
completely ignoring Harry. 'Initiation of Primary Phasing in forty-five seconds
from now.'

At that moment, Sarah's voice burst loudly over the intercom. 'Hello, Rogin.
I've reached what feels like a three way junction... it's very tight...'



Rogin traced his finger over an illuminated plan of the conduit structure on
the video-screen before him. 'You are making good progress,' he replied. 'You
must now proceed to the left.' There was a short silence, broken by the sound
of Sarah's struggling efforts.

'I can... I can hardly move at all...' she suddenly panted. There was the sound
of a brief tussle, and then Sarah's frightened whisper. 'I think the cable is caught.
somehow...'

Vira swung angrily round on Harry. 'You should not have left the conduit
hatch,' she said icily. 'The cable is obstructed.'

Harry shamefacedly Scrambled back down the alloy ladder, and descended
swiftly to the Docking Area.

Inside the conduit, Sarah was drenched in perspiration despite the intense
coldness which numbed her fingers. She had to fight for every breath. Her knees
and elbows were raw from scraping against the sides of the narrow shafts. Her
hair repeatedly caught itself between her shoulders and the metal sides of the
conduits, forcing her to continually retreat a few centimetres in order to release
it. The smooth sides afforded her nothing to grip on. She could move only with
a kind of caterpillar action which was terribly exhausting; she contracted her
body, pressed her knees against the shaft and then straightened her body, pressed
her elbows outwards and finally drew her legs along after her by contracting her
body. She had to repeat this awkward sequence over and over again. She was
often close to despair as the cable snagged, or the bulky knot which Harry had
tied jammed itself between her hip and the side of the shaft.

Now she was twisting this way and that in a frantic attempt to free the cable;
but it refused to budge, and the more Sarah wriggled, the tighter she became
stuck. Tears of frustration welled up in her eyes. Her skin seemed to adhere
to the cold metal shaft, and would only come away with a sharp and painful
wrench. She could see absolutely nothing. She gasped for oxygen. She could
move neither forwards nor backwards. 'It's just no good...' she sobbed. 'I'm sorry,
I can't do anything to...'

All at once she felt the cable tugging. For a horrifying moment she thought
that something was in the shaft with her, and trying to drag her back towards
itself. She had a fleeting vision of the Wirrrn larvae bubbling up through the
shaft and engulfing her in a searing, suffocating mass. Then she realised that
the jerking of the cable formed a regular pattern; it seemed like a morse code
message! After a few minutes concentration she deciphered it: 'COMEONOLD
GIRL... YOU CAN DO IT.' Instantly Sarah's energy increased a hundredfold.
'Patronising male chauvinist,' she muttered through clenched teeth, visualising
Harry's anxious face at the other end of the conduit.

With a supreme effort she eased herself forward a few centimetres. To her
amazement and joy the cable did not resist. 'Just... you wait... till I get out...' she
panted.

'Please repeat your last message,' requested Rogin's puzzled voice over the
communicator.

Sarah heaved herself forward. 'Message cancelled,' she replied. At once she
was confronted by a bewildering array of shafts branching off in all directions.
Even followingRogin's careful instructions, it was almost impossible to orientate



oneself in the pitch darkness. Sarah knew that if she took a wrong tunnel, or
came to a dead end, she had no chance of making her way back again.

A faint glimmer of light ahead spurred her on. 'I can see light,' shewhispered
excitedly into the tiny microphone.

'Yes,' came Rogin's encouraging reply. 'You are entering an old
Hydrodynamics System. It runs right through the Solar Chamber—move as
quietly as you can.' To her horror, Sarah found that the conduit had become
tubular in section, and even narrower than before. She now had to stretch out
her arms ahead of her, and to move forward by turning her whole body like a
corkscrew. She ceased to be aware of her badly grazed elbows and knees, of the
burning sensation in her lungs, but forced herself onward through the tube. Her
painfully slow progress was further hampered by her legs becoming inextricably
tangled with the cable as she rotated her body.

She soon found herself in a section constructed of translucent material. Her
pounding heart missed a beat as she recognised, through the thick glass-like
material, the subdued glow of the Solar Chamber. Rogin's voice camewhispering
through the earpiece; it seemed to come from the other side of the universe.
'Quietly now, Sarah...'

She froze as, from the depths of the Solar Chamber, there loomed two
enormous eyes. Helplessly Sarah stared back at theWirrrn crawling towards her,
its gigantic mandibles working hungrily. The creature gripped the tube with its
tentacles. In vain Sarah tried to flinch away from the slashing, razor hairs as they
squeaked against the conduit only centimetres from her body.

The Wirrrn tried to take the tube between its mandibles. Sarah could see
right into the dark red pulsing throat of the giant insect. She felt violently sick.
Rogin's voice came urgently over the communicator. 'Sarah... what is
happening... are you safe?'

The inside of the tube had steamed up so that Sarah could no longer see her
attacker, but only hear the shrill scrape of its tentacles, and feel the shuddering
of the tube as the Wirrrn tried to crush it. She marvelled at the extraordinary
strength of the unfamiliar glassy substance which was all that kept her from the
jaws of the creature. She felt like a fly trapped in a blob of amber which could
at any moment be smashed to smithereens with a hammer.

She collected her wits, and frantically twisted herself along the tube. The
Wirrrn followed, angrily wrenching at the conduit, its eyes burning at her through
the tubing and its massive jaws completely enclosing her struggling body. Sarah
glimpsed more and more of the fierce glowing eyes clustering around her as she
fought her way through the final section of the Solar Chamber... She imagined
herself crawling through the bowels of some prodigious mythical beast.

To her relief, the tube suddenly reverted to metal sections. She welcomed
the darkness with its feeling of security, but she could not be sure that the Wirrrn
would not eventually manage to shatter the 'glass' section and sever the vital
cable—or even drag her backwards into the Solar Chamber again.

'Is... is it much further...?' she implored, her imagination conjuring an
endless maze of dark, stifling tunnels in which she was condemned to crawl for
ever.

'You are almost there... another fifteen metres,' came Rogin's welcome
reply.



'I do hope so...' Sarah gasped, '... because I don't think I can go on much
longer.'

'Stick at it, old girl,' came Harry's cheerful voice.
'That's just the trouble,' Sarah snapped back. 'I keep getting stuck.' Then she

managed a smile to herself as she visualised Vira's and Rogin's blank stares on
hearing her little joke.

The Doctor had almost completed his preparations in the Cryogenic
Chamber. For the moment, the Wirrrn seemed to be leaving him in peace,
deterred perhaps by the discovery of the corpse of the Queen. Nevertheless, the
Doctor remained fully alert as he crouched in the darkness, sonic-welding cables
from the wall terminals into a large junction box by torchlight. From time to
time, he crossed to the central shaft and listened for signs of Sarah's progress.
It was nearly an hour since he had bid her good luck in the Cincture Structure.
He knew that it could not be very long before the Wirrrn in the Solar Chamber
reached imago form in overwhelming numbers, and returned to the attack.

There was a hollow, distant panting sound which suddenly reverberated in
the central shaft. The Doctor raced across the chamber into the elevator cubicle
where the Wirrrn Queen had been hidden, and put his ear to the side of the shaft.

'Sarah...' he murmured. He tapped rhythmically and then listened. His
tapping was repeated beat for beat. 'Sarah... Hurry, Sarah... hurry,' he called,
shining his torch up into the darkness. Ducts and conduits ran into the shaft at
right angles as far as the Doctor could see. He directed the torch-beam at each
aperture in turn. 'Can you see anything, my dear?' he said. There was a pause,
then Sarah's faint reply.

'No... not. yet. I'm now in some kind of coiled section, Doctor. I'm not sure
I can get round the bends...'

'Of course you can, Sarah,' encouraged the Doctor, keeping a wary eye on
the dark vault of the Cryogenic Chamber. 'You've got this far...'

'But, Doctor, I'm completely stuck this time,' Sarah 'whimpered. '... I seem
to be glued to the sides.' The tall shaft rang with Sarah's sobs of frustration and
fear. 'Doctor, I'm... I'm upside down... and I feel very very faint....'

The Doctor stared upwards, his face full of anxiety. They were so close to
succeeding. Sarah could not fail now. He cupped his hands to his mouth and
bellowed as loudly as he could up into the shadows. 'That's right... blubber away,
Sarah... just what I expected of you.'

There was a brief pause, then Sarah protested tearfully, 'But, Doctor, I am
completely jammed. I can't go up or down.'

'Oh, stop whining, girl,' retorted the Doctor brutally. 'You are utterly
useless.'

There was a shocked silence. 'Doctor,' Sarah's voice came through at last.
'Doctor, how can you...'

But the Doctor showed no remorse. Instead of apologising he went on, 'It
was a mistake to rely on you in the first place... Harry was quite right—It was
no job for a girl...'

Sarah had heard enough. She wrenched herself round and round inside the
tortuous spiralling tube in a frenzy, oblivious of pain, fear or discomfort. 'You
wait... I'll show you...' she gasped.



The Doctor was smiling broadly to himself, delighted that his little ruse had
worked so well. 'The future of Mankind at stake, and all you can do is lie there
blubbering,' he called as a final goad to Sarah's temper.

But Sarah was no longer listening. Within a few minutes her head appeared
out of one of the ducts high up in the shaft wall. In the torchlight the Doctor
could see that her hair was matted and her face streaked with tears, but her smile
was triumphant.

The Doctor grinned up at her. 'Splendid, Sarah. I knew you would do it,'
he whispered.

Sarah peered down at him in amazement, dazzled by the torch. Then she
smiled again. 'You are a brute,' she laughed, despite her exhaustion. 'You conned
me completely.'

'Just trying to encourage you, my dear, that's all,' the Doctor murmured
innocently. He shone the torch around the sides of the shaft. Sarah was stranded
a good thirty metres above him. 'Now all we have to do is get you down,' he said.

'Oh, please don't worry about me. I'll just jump,' retorted Sarah. 'As long as
you get the cable down safely I'm sure I hardly matter.'

The Doctor swept the, torch round the cubicle. 'If we had any power I could
fetch you down in the lift,' he said.

There came a sharp rattling sound from the Access Chamber. Instantly the
Doctor began working away with the two lengths of his scarf. Sarah could not
see what he was doing, but she gasped in astonishment and admiration when,
after a few seconds, he flashed the torch quickly over the giant 'cat's cradle' he
had fashioned across the bottom of the shaft, using the framework of the open
elevator cubicle on which to secure the scarf-ends.

'Jump, Sarah, jump,' the' Doctor hissed.
Without pausing to think, Sarah obeyed and leaped into the dark abyss. She

landed in the safety-net the Doctor had improvised. A pair of strong hands came
out of the darkness and lifted her gently but quickly down.

'Harry's tied the Gordian Knot here all right,' whispered the Doctor,
feverishly trying to undo the cable from around Sarah's waist.

Over the Doctor's shoulder, Sarah suddenly noticed the unmistakable glow
of aWirrrn's eyes on the far side of the Cryogenic Chamber. Only minutes earlier
she had been struggling between the jaws of one of the fearsome creatures inside
the conduit. A violent shudder shook her body and she thrust her fingers into
her mouth to stifle a scream. At the same moment, the Doctor freed the cable.
Something was pushed into her free hand. It was the torch. 'Try to distract it,
Sarah,' murmured the Doctor, moving stealthily away from her with the cable.

'What... ?' she gasped. But. there was no time to protest.
She switched on the torch and shone the beam up over her face from under

her chin, transforming her features into a macabre mask suspended in mid-air.
She felt the Doctor detach the communicator set from around her head.

'Splendid idea,' prompted his voice in her ear. 'But whatever you do, keep
away from the walls.'

Sarah began to sidestep away from the Doctor, her eyes fixed firmly on
those of the Wirrrn. The huge, ochre globes swung steadily towards her; she
could hear the heavy, leathery body dragging itself across the chamber floor as
she backed away from it. Still very dazed from her ordeal inside the conduit



system, Sarah struggled to visualise the exact shape of the Cryogenic Chamber
so that she would not back into any of the walls; she knew that hundreds of
thousands of volts would surge through themwhenRogin switched on the power.
She could just make out the Doctor's whispered instructions to Rogin through
the communicator. Counting her faltering steps, Sarah knew she must be very
close to the chamber wall. Still the Wirrrn bore down upon her.

Suddenly, to her left, she heard the Doctor whistling as if he were calling
a dog. 'Here... Here, boy...' he coaxed. The Wirrrn's eyes turned away from her
and began moving towards the sounds. The Doctor fell silent, and the Wirrrn
hesitated. Then it resumed its pursuit of Sarah. She switched off the torch, darted
a few steps to the right in the pitch darkness, then crouched quite still, holding her
breath. Again the Wirrrn stopped. Its eyes began to glow a bright fierce orange.
The menacing rattle sounded. Sarah found herself mesmerised as the Wirrrn's
eyes swung hypnotically before her. She could feel it tantalising her. Then her
blood ran cold as she heard what sounded-like sharp intakes of breath which
rapidly grew into a rhythmic roaring, like the sound of a gigantic bellows. The
creature was sniffing her out...

The Doctor whistled again, this time from her right. The Wirrrn hovered
uncertainly a moment, then moved swiftly towards the invisible figure.

'Torch, Sarah. Torch ,' screamed the Doctor. Sarah switched on the torch
and waved it recklessly about. The Wirrrn swooped towards her. She crept
backwards, step by step, shining the torch-beam directly into the creature's eyes.
With a rattle of triumph the Wirrrn reared up over her. She froze as something
crumpled against the backs of her legs. She dropped the torch and toppled
backwards into the disintegrated corpse of the Wirrrn Queen... At the same
instant she heard the Doctor shouting into the communicator. 'Now, Rogin. Now
.'

A blinding blue-white flash lit up the Cryogenic Chamber. Sarah glimpsed
the huge pincer slicing down at her. There was an ear-splitting shriek, and the
sound of a massive body thrashing about in agony. Something soft and rubbery
brushed across Sarah's face. A sickly burning smell filled the darkness. She lay
among the rotting tentacles of the Wirrrn Queen shivering with nausea and
choking from the acrid fumes. Then came the sound of the crippled Wirrrn
crawling slowly away from her, and moaning with a croaking, gurgling cry
which reverberated around the chamber until it died away into silence. As it
gradually faded, the comforting gentle humming of the Cryogenic Systems
resumed and the familiar faint glowing reappeared in the pallets. All around her
the Chamber came back to life. Sarah closed her eyes in relief but before she
could haul herself to her feet, she suddenly felt extremely dizzy. She keeled over
on her side in a dead faint just as the Doctor reached her...



8 A New Beginning

In the Flight Control Module of the Transporter Vessel, the tension was
becoming unbearable. Harry, Rogin andVira waited anxiously for news from the
Cryogenic Chamber. Sarah's piercing cries and the bizarre shrieks of the Wirrrn
still rang vividly in their ears. Harry was hunched over the communicator set
calling again and again. 'Doctor... Sarah... are you all right? Come in please...
Doctor, can you hear me...?' But there was no reply, only a relentless silence.
Vira kept watch on the Launch Area through the video scanner, while Rogin,
grim-faced, monitored the Transporter's generator systems.

'We cannot maintain this level of power indefinitely, Commander,' he
warned.

As if in reply, the Doctor's voice suddenly came through on the
communicator. 'Rogin, whatever happens don't let the power fade. We've won
the first round... and I've managed to feed some energy into the Cryogenic
Systems, but there's very little to spare...'

'You have done well, Doctor,' interposed Vira.
'Thank you,' came the Doctor's reply. 'But if the Wirrrn should detect our

power source, you could be in grave danger. You had better electrify the Launch
Dock.'

Rogin interrupted to explain that such a plan was impossible since the
Transporter Vessel was moored to the Satellite by Synestic Locks.

'How very inconvenient, Rogin,' came the Doctor's disappointed voice. 'I
should have realised: if you energise the Docking Area you may reverse the
Synestic Fields and push the Transporter Ship out into Space.'

'Exactly, Doctor,' murmured Rogin.
There was a short silence. The Doctor spoke slowly and pointedly over the

intercom. 'Well, you ought to think of something, Rogin, before theWirrrn think
of you...' The communicator went dead again. Harry tried to re-establish contact,
but without success.

Rogin turned to Vira, his face filled with dismay. 'Commander, I shall soon
be forced to reduce power... our generators will be needed for the transfer to
Earth... we cannot risk a malfunction.' Vira nodded gravely.

Harry sensed a certain irresolution in the manner of his two companions.
'Don't forget,' he warned. 'If the Wirrrn should get into the Cryogenic Chamber
there won't be any transfer to Earth.'

In the Cryogenic Chamber, Sarah sat propped against the elevator shaft,
recovering from her ordeal. She had regained consciousness to find herself
wrapped in the Doctor's voluminous jacket, and the Doctor bending anxiously
over her. She was still shivering with cold, and beginning to notice the effect of
the oxygen system being shut down. She kept a wary eye on the opening into
the Access Chamber, just visible in the restored glow of the pallets, while the
Doctor bustled about the chamber checking his circuits leading from the junction
box. One set was feeding power into the pallet Revivification Systems, while
the other supplied the improvised 'electric fence' around the lower section of the



chamber walls, and also the trailing cable with which the Doctor had fought off
the Wirrrn attacker.

'Not bad for a lash-up, eh?' he grinned. 'But I hope the insulation will stand
it,' he added, gesturing round at the pallets on floor level which were still
occupied by dormant humans.

Sarah nodded towards theAccess Chamber. 'TheWirrrn knowwherewe are
now,' she whispered, clutching the Doctor's jacket closer to herself for warmth.

The Doctor waved the torch about under his chin. 'You pulled such faces,'
he chuckled in an effort to reassure Sarah. 'I don't think the Wirrrn, will be in
a hurry to come back...'

Without warning the Access Chamber was flooded with light. Sarah
shielded her eyes against the intense glare which temporarily obliterated her view
of the entrance. 'Why have they turned the power back on?' she cried. The Doctor
shrugged. Still carrying the free-running cable, he advanced towards the Access
Chamber, motioning Sarah to staywhere shewas. Just as he reached the entrance,
a distorted gabbling suddenly burst out all around them. For a second Sarah
imagined that the sleeping humans in the Cryogenic Chamber had suddenly
revived, and that they were shouting in unison at her in a language she did not
understand. She rushed to the Doctor's side in terror.

They stood in the Access Chamber listening to the eerie cacophony echoing
around them. It was punctuated by harsh squeaks and hoarse whistlings.
Gradually, there emerged a ghostly whisper, the shadow of Noah's human voice.
'Vira... Vira... hear me...'

The Doctor indicated to Sarah to keep quiet, and went over to the intercom
panel set into one of the Access Chamber systems consoles. He flicked the
talkback button. 'What do you want, Noah?' he called.

A hostile buzzing issued from the intercom. Through it rose Noah's hollow
whispering. 'Your resistance is useless. We control the Satellite.' The vicious
buzzing increased as if in approval of Noah's words.

'And we control the Cryogenic Section,' said the Doctor defiantly. 'I repeat,
what do you want?'

'Go now... your lives will be spared,' came Noah's blurred reply.
'Impossible,' shouted the Doctor contemptuously.
The babble of Wirrrn voices reached a crescendo of furious anger. Noah's

words struggled to be heard. 'Let... Vira... speak... She is Commander...'
The Doctor waited a moment, then he said, 'Vira is occupied with the

revivification of her people.'
The boning of theWirrrn reached a deafening roar. Again Noah's voice rose

above. it, this time filled with scorn for the Doctor's attempted bluff. 'That cannot
be; the systems are isolated.'

The Doctor gave an exaggerated laugh. 'You forget, Noah, I have quite a
way with electronics.'

'You lie,' Noah screamed, his voice breaking into monstrous gasps and
screeching sounds.. 'I am the Swarm Leader... I guarantee your safety... if you
leave the Sleepers for us.' The Doctor said nothing. The Wirrrn gradually fell
silent, then Noah hissed, 'If you refuse... we will suffocate you.'

Sarah stared at the Doctor with frightened eyes. She remembered only too
well the terrible sensation of breathlessness when the TARDIS had first



materialised in the Satellite's Control Centre, and also during her ordeal inside
the conduits. The Doctor gazed at the intercom panel, his face filled not with
anger or hate, but with a kind of infinite weariness. He closed his eyes, racking
his brains for some stratagemwith which to defeat theWirrrn. After a long pause,
during which the angry murmurs from the Solar Chamber began to rise again,
he started to speak very quietly, in a last appeal to Noah..

'Noah... please listen to me... if there remains within you any trace of your
humanity—if you have any memory of the human you once were... leave the
Terra Nova... lead, your swarm into Space—that is where the Wirrrn belong...
not on Earth... Earth is for the humans... Do you remember the Earth, Noah?...
the wind... the sea... the sky... dawn and sunset...'

Noah broke in with a prolonged sighing voice which sounded through the
chambers long after the intercom went dead. 'I... have... no memory of... the
Earth...'

In the Transporter ControlModule, Harry had begun to fear theworst. There
had been no contact with the Doctor since his warning about a Wirrrn attack
on the Docking Sector, and he was also anxious for news of Sarah after her
heroic success in reaching the Cryogenic Chamber. He was staring gloomily at
the video scanner, wishing there were some simple way of returning to his office
at UNIT Headquarters and forgetting all about Satellites and giant locusts and
travelling Police Boxes.

Suddenly he leaned forward to look more closely at the fluorescent screen.
'I say, Rogin,' he murmured. 'I don't want to be an alarmist, but there's something
moving out there.'

Rogin swung round and adjusted the scanner. A blurred, moving shape
came into focus; three Wirrrn were crawling across the Docking Area towards
the struts leading up to the Transporter's open maintenance hatch. At once Rogin
manoeuvred himself over to the Propulsion Unit Panel. He began to operate a
series of keys, muttering mechanically to himself. 'Particle Emission Phase:
initiated...' A colourful illuminated scale began to register on the panel.
'Acceleration to Tachyon Phase... Negative Thrust... Go.' The Transporter was
enveloped in a piercing whine. It vibrated and shuddered at its anchorage. 'The
Synestic Locking Field is holding,' Rogin called above the din.

All at once, the view of the Docking Area on the scanner was obliterated
by a brilliant blue glare. After a few seconds, Rogin shut down the Propulsion
Unit. The incandescent glare faded gradually away, revealing in the centre of the
Docking Section a shapeless blob of colourless matter like melted glass. It was
the fused remains of the three Wirrrn.

'Good show, Rogin,' cried Harry. 'That singed their whiskers!'
Vira sat staring blankly at the massive crystal shimmering beneath the

Transporter. 'I wonder if Noah...' she began, then she lapsed into silence.
'Commander?' Rogin inquired gently.
Vira immediately recovered herself. 'It is of no importance,' she said firmly.
'Are you all right over there?' The Doctor's voice boomed over the

communicator.
'Doctor!' said Harry. 'Yes, we're fine, thanks. Nice to hear from you at last.'

Harry quickly explained what had happened.



'They're up to something clever,' the Doctor muttered grimly. '... For some
reason they've restored the power here...'

A series of warning lights flickered in front of Rogin. He leaned over and
adjusted the scanner so that it showed the outside of the Transporter hull, and
the great silver shape of the Terra Nova turning slowly against the multitude of
stars...

Floating eerily from around the outside of the Solar Chamber there came a
cluster of Wirrrn. As they drifted into view, they linked their tentacles together,
forming a chain which snaked its way slowly across towards the Transport
Vessel. The Wirrrn looked like giant sea creatures, feeling their way through the
deep.

Harry spoke rapidly into the communicator. 'Doctor, the Wirrrn have
broken out of the Solar Chamber. They are approaching us. It looks as if the
whole swarm is going to attack.'

Rogin glanced across at Vira. 'Commander, if the Wirrrn break into the hull
we shall be lost. The internal bulkheads have a low stress tolerance...'

On the scanner, the Wirrrn leader could be seen feeling with its antennae
for a suitable gripping point on the hull of the Transporter Vessel.

'Have you all gone to sleep?' shouted the Doctor. 'Rogin, cut the power.
We're coming out.' Rogin obeyed. They heard the Doctor conferring with Sarah,
then he added, 'Rogin, if the Transporter has an Automatic Flight System then
initiate it at once, and evacuate the ship.'

Vira turned to Rogin in shocked protest. 'I forbid this. If we sacrifice the
Transport Vessel we have no hope of returning to Earth...'

Rogin said nothing, but pointed to the scanner screen. TheWirrrn leader had
now secured itself to the Transporter hull; one by one the creatures clambered
over the 'bridge' formed by the others. The Wirrrn were soon swarming all over
the hull. A sickening tearing sound rang through the Ship; warning lights
flickered on the panel in front of Rogin. 'The Wirrrn have pierced the hull in the
Stabiliser Unit, Commander,' he cried. 'The sealing shutters are operating.'

Rogin frantically began to programme the Transporter for Automatic
Launch in accordance with the Doctor's instructions. He did not understand the
Doctor's intention, but he had come to trust and respect the shambling, eccentric
stranger.

Harry manipulated the scanner, panning down towards the Transporter
Propulsion Unit. What he saw sent shivers along his spine—a huge Wirrrn was
tearing through the hull with its pincer as easily as a plough cutting a furrow in
the soil. It was rapidly ripping a hole large enough for itself to enter. The whine
of the Ship's generators, the shrill scrambling of the Wirrrn and the shriek of
tearing metal combined into a deafening cacophony. More warnings suddenly
appeared on the panels as the internal bulkheads began to yield.

'The Wirrrn have entered the Transport Vessel,' Rogin shouted, pushing
Harry towards the hatch in the floor of the Control Module. 'You have four
minutes to leave the Ship and clear the Launch Area before the Dock Shield
opens and the Dock de-pressurizes to vacuum.' Harry nodded and followed Vira
down the alloy ladder. All around them, the Transporter resounded with the
Wirrrn's onslaught as they clambered hastily down the servicing tunnels,
desperately making for the maintenance hatch before the Wirrrn could penetrate



into the bowels of the Vessel. At any moment, a giant pincer might slice through
a bulkhead, or a panel might open to reveal a rearing Wirrrn, its claw poised in
triumph, barring their escape.

They reached the maintenance hatch safely and Rogin caught up with them
as they slid down. the struts to the Launch Deck. At the samemoment, the Doctor
and Sarah emerged from the airlock and they all met beneath the gigantic
propulsion nozzles, where the twisted remains of the three Wirrrn lay like a vast
glass sculpture. The Doctor gestured to Harry to escort Sarah and Vira back
through the airlocks into the main Satellite. Harry tried to object to deserting
the Doctor and Rogin at such a vital moment, but the Doctor pushed him firmly
away. SoonHarry and the twowomenweremaking their way cautiously towards
the Control Centre where the TARDIS stood patiently waiting. To their
amazement and relief they did not encounter any Wirrrn as they crept through
the chambers' and tunnels of the Satellite.

With the Transporter's motors thundering above their heads as the Tachyon
Drive prepared to 'go critical', Rogin and the Doctor each ran to one of the main
anchorage struts beneath the propulsion nozzles. Rogin pointed to the
chronometer bracelet on his wrist, and then held up two fingers. The Doctor
nodded and brandished the sonic screwdriver; Rogin nodded and held up his
synestic key. They both immediately set to work to release the Synestic locks
—three in number—on the main struts. Having completed the first one, Rogin
glanced at his wrist. The chronometer scale showed barely a minute remaining
before the huge circular shield, a hundred metres above them, opened like the
'iris' in a camera, allowing the atmosphere inside the Launch Area to evacuate
into Space.

The Doctor had also completed the release of his synestic anchorage. They
both made for the third and final lock, and arrived at the strut together. The
Doctor motioned Rogin to take refuge in the safety of the airlocks. Rogin shook
his head and bent down to deal with the remaining magnetic clamp. 'Get into the
airlock, man,' the Doctor screamed in Rogin's ear. '... There's no sense in us both
being disintegrated.' He tried to pull Rogin away from the strut. With a sudden
lightning movement, Rogin stood up, catching the Doctor neatly on the chin with
his head. The Doctor slumped heavily on to the deck.

Rogin dragged him across to the airlock and dumped him inside. He closed
the outer shutter and ran back to the third synestic lock. On his chronometer
bracelet the red arc showed just five seconds to zero. As Rogin released the last
clamp, he was enveloped in a deathly chill: the air was sucked out of his lungs,
and the blood began to boil in his veins as the Docking Section de-pressurized.
Far above him, the elegant 'iris' shield was opening to allow the Transporter to
launch itself into Space. He crumpled with a soundless scream...

A few moments later, the Launch Area was filled with a searing plasma
discharge. Rogin's body was transformed into a shapeless and colourless crystal
in microseconds. Almost imperceptibly at first, the huge Transport Vessel
separated from the Launch Assembly and began to climb away from the Docking
Area. The very gradual acceleration was designed to disturb the Satellite's orbit
as little as possible.

In the Control Centre, Sarah, Harry and Vira—watching on the main
scanner—felt the slightest jolt. They stared in silence as the Transport Ship



moved slowly away from the Terra Nova. Of the swarming Wirrrn there was
no trace. The massive, ovoid craft began to accelerate into the depths of Space,
its Tachyon Propulsion System leaving a brilliant blue aura in its wake. It grew
smaller and smaller, finally becoming indistinguishable among the myriad stars.
The luminous 'comet' tail lingered a little longer, then it too faded into nothing.

At last, Vira spoke. 'The Doctor and Technop Rogin must have perished
instantly.' Sarah turned away from the scanner, stifling the sobs that rose in her
throat. Harry moved over to her side, and put his arm gently round her shoulders.

'Come on now, old girl,' he said. 'You know he'd have wanted you to be
brave.'

Sarah shook her head. 'It's such a waste,' she murmured.
'Not if it means that Vira's people are saved,' said Harry consolingly. 'I think

we've seen the last of the Wirrrn.'
But Sarah was overwhelmed; she looked up at Harry, her eyes brimming

with tears. 'Harry, I just can't believe it... I just can't.'
'What can't you believe, Sarah?' boomed a familiar voice. The Doctor was

standing in the entrance to the neighbouring Control Chamber, massaging his
bruised chin. They were all too stunned to move or speak. The Doctor walked
sadly across to Vira. He took her gently by the arm. 'Rogin is dead,' he said.

'He sacrificed himself so that the Satellite would be saved.' Vira nodded and
turned slowly away towards the Cryogenic Systems Monitor Panel.

Sarah at last found her voice. 'Doctor... how did you escape... ?'
'Thanks to Rogin's bravery—and perhaps also to something else...' The

Doctor's words tailed off as he turned to stare at the scanner screen where the
Transporter had disappeared among the stars.

'Something else, Doctor?' asked Harry, puzzled.
The Doctor walked over to the scanner. 'Yes, Harry. Some vestige of the

indomitable human spirit, perhaps.' He turned to face them. 'Was Noah onemove
ahead of us all the time... and even of the Wirrrn at the end...?'

Vira looked at the Doctor in astonishment. 'You mean that Noah
deliberately led the Swarm into the Transporter?'

The Doctor smiled and nodded. 'I took a gamble that he would, and that...'
The Doctor was interrupted by a rapid bleeping; an indicator pulsed on the

External Communications Panel. Vira stared at it for amoment, then hurried over
and touched a switch. 'Project Terra Nova... The Commander,' she said crisply,
identifying herself. Above the faint mush of static they gradually distinguished
the distant murmur of theWirrrn Swarm. A single, clearly human voice emerged
and softly filled the Control Chamber.

'Farewell... Farewell, Vira...'
Vira stretched her arms out towards the scanner. She struggled to speak, but

could not. Her arms fell back to her sides, and she stood motionless. All at once,
one of the billions of tiny points of light flickering on the screen flared up like a
supernova. For a moment it blazed, then it disappeared into nothingness.

'The Transport Ship's exploded,' Harry gasped. The Doctor walked
thoughtfully away a few paces and then looked back at the scanner.

'Infinite Mass,' he muttered to himself. 'Noah had absorbed all Dune's
technical knowledge. He must have known that would happen. He deliberately
neglected to activate the plasma stabilisers.'



Sarah looked at the Doctor in amazement. 'You mean Noah sacrificed the
Wirrrn for our sakes?' she cried.

Vira spoke with firm emphasis. 'Noah sacrificed himself for the sake of his
people here,' she said.

The Doctor nodded and smiled at her. 'Now you can at last begin the great
awakening of your people,' he said. But Vira shook her head. She was
contemplating the Cryogenic Systems Monitor Panel which indicated that the
initiation of the Main Revivification Phase was imminent.

'It is too late,' she murmured. 'Without the Transport Ship we have nomeans
of reaching Earth.' The Doctor frowned. He glanced irritably at Sarah and Harry,
as if this latest difficulty were their fault. Vira moved towards the panel, her hand
raised, as if she were about to cancel the Revivification Process once and for all,
and abandon the great plan which had succeeded thus far against incalculable
odds.

The Doctor rushed forward and seized Vira's arm.
'Wait,' he cried. 'The Terra Nova Project will still be fulfilled. You can use

the Matter Transmitter to reach Earth.'
Again Vira shook her head. 'There is no receiver on Earth. It is an internal

system only.'
The Doctor put his hands on Vira's shoulders and looked earnestly into her

eyes. 'If you and your people will trust me,' he said, 'I can go down to Earth and
fix something up for you. With a little bit of juggling at this end we should be
able to make it all work.' Vira stared at the Doctor as if he were demented. 'Oh,
I realise that you'll have to travel one at a time,' he shrugged. 'And of course it
will require enormous power; but I am sure that your Solar Power engineers will
be able to oblige,' he added with a smile.

Vira opened her mouth to object, but the Doctor broke in briskly, with a
gesture towards the Cryogenic Systems Panel. 'Look,' he cried. 'It's almost
“reveille”. We must make a start.'

Everyone followed the Doctor as he strode into the adjacent Control
Chamber. Vira stared open-mouthed as the Doctor unlocked the door of the
TARDIS. 'Old faithful,' he murmured affectionately, patting the chipped and
faded blue paintwork.

Vira gasped in disbelief. 'Do you ask me to accept that you are intending to
convey yourself to Earth... by means of this... this obsolete artefact?'

The Doctor looked grieved. He rubbed his finger across the dirty frosted-
glass panes in the door, and grimaced at the blackened skin. 'This,' he said
proudly, 'is a vintage specimen of Time And Relative Dimensions In Space
technology—TARDIS—and, far from being obsolete, it has not even been
invented yet.'

The Doctor adjusted his charred hat to a jaunty angle, and turned to step into
the TARDIS. He collided with Harry who, hands firmly thrust into his pockets
to avoid the temptation to tamper with anything, was about to enter with Sarah.

'Where do you two think you are going?' he demanded.
'Oh, you're bound to need a helping hand down there, Doctor,' Sarah

laughed. 'You always do....'
Harry smiled apologetically. 'The Brigadier did ask me to keep an eye on

you, Doctor,' he said.



The Doctor frowned, then he motioned them inside. 'Very well, just this
once,' he agreed grudgingly. 'But you'd better both put some warm things on—
one never knows what the weather's going to be like.' Sarah and Harry
disappeared eagerly inside.

The Doctor turned to Vira. 'We shouldn't be very long,' he said.
'I shall expect you... soon,' replied Vira. 'Meanwhile I must return to the

Cryogenic Chamber. The Main Phase is beginning.'
Sarah and Harry reappeared in the doorway of the TARDIS, clad in

waterproofs and wellington boots.
'Back soon,' cried the Doctor, waving the jelly-baby bag. He broke off a

piece from the melted contents and threw the bag to Vira. 'Good luck,' he called.
Vira caught the bag neatly. 'Good... luck... ?' she repeated the unfamiliar

phrase to herself, puzzled.
An extraordinary groaning sound made her look up. A bright yellow light

was flashing on top of the strange blue box into which the Doctor and his
companions had entered... As she watched, the box faded and gradually
disappeared.

Suddenly Vira smiled in recognition. 'Yes... yes,' she cried. 'Good luck...'
She tentatively broke off a small piece from the sticky lump in the bag and

put it into her mouth. She grimaced, then she smiled and nodded in approval at
the taste. She looked at the empty space where the TARDIS had stood. 'Good
luck, Doctor... and thank you,' she murmured.

She turned and left. In the Cryogenic Chamber, her people were awakening
in their hundreds. At last her task had begun...



Table of Contents
Prologue The Intruder
1 The Second Invasion
2 Sarah Vanishes
4 A Fatal Wound
5 The Wirrrn
6 Time Running Out
7 A Tight Squeeze
8 A New Beginning