The second season of the American political drama television series The West Wing aired in the United States on NBC from October 4, 2000 to May 16, 2001 and consisted of 22 episodes.


== Production ==
The second season made frequent use of flashbacks, revealing Bartlet's campaign for the presidency in the period prior to events covered in the first season. The first two episodes, "In the Shadow of Two Gunmen, Part I" and "In the Shadow of Two Gunmen, Part II", showed how many of the central characters were introduced to Josiah Bartlet, his campaign for the presidential nomination, and his election. Aaron Sorkin originally planned to have such flashbacks as a major part of the entire season, but budget and logistical demands prevented this.


== Cast ==
The second season had star billing for eight major roles. Seven of these were filled by returning main cast members from the first season, while Moira Kelly departed the cast at the end of the previous season. Rob Lowe once again receives star billing, while Martin Sheen receives the "and" credit for his role as President Josiah Bartlet. The rest of the ensemble, now including previously recurring Janel Moloney, are credited alphabetically.


=== Main cast ===
Rob Lowe as Sam Seaborn, Deputy Communications Director
Dulé Hill as Charlie Young, Personal Aide to the President
Allison Janney as C. J. Cregg, White House Press Secretary
Janel Moloney as Donna Moss, Assistant to the Deputy Chief of Staff
Richard Schiff as Toby Ziegler, Communications Director
John Spencer as Leo McGarry, White House Chief of Staff
Bradley Whitford as Josh Lyman, Deputy Chief of Staff
Martin Sheen as Josiah Bartlet, President of the United States


=== Recurring cast ===
Timothy Busfield as Danny Concannon, senior White House correspondent for The Washington Post
Stockard Channing as Abbey Bartlet, First Lady of the United States
Anna Deavere Smith as Nancy McNally, National Security Advisor
Kathryn Joosten as Dolores Landingham, Executive  Secretary to the President
Marlee Matlin as Joey Lucas, a Democratic political consultant
Elisabeth Moss as Zoey Bartlet, The President's youngest daughter
Tim Matheson as John Hoynes, Vice President of the United States
Oliver Platt as Oliver Babish, White House Counsel
Emily Procter as Ainsley Hayes, Deputy White House Counsel
Nicole Robinson as Margaret Hooper, Assistant to the White House Chief of Staff


== Plot ==
The second season details the period between the end of President Bartlet's second year in office and the middle of his third. It covers a wider legislative array than the first season does, and presents issues including the rights of hate groups and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
In this season, The West Wing characters are shown as being more capable of legislating thanks to an increased approval rating (described as a temporary "bubble" due to the shooting that ends the first season). Also vital to this theme is the new doctrine for legislating laid out in the first-season episode "Let Bartlet Be Bartlet."
The multiple sclerosis arc (also introduced in the first season) becomes central late in the second season as staff members are introduced one-by-one to the President's ailment and the public made aware. This theme remains central to the entire series.
Mrs. Landingham, the longtime secretary of President Bartlet, dies in the penultimate episode, "18th and Potomac." In the final episode, "Two Cathedrals," Mrs. Landingham's funeral is central as is the question of whether the President will run for re-election.
The season ends with the President announcing his multiple sclerosis, and concludes just moments before he answers a reporter's question: "Mr. President, can you tell us right now if you'll be seeking a second term?"


== Episodes ==


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the season has an approval rating of 88% with an average score of 10 out of 10 based on 24 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "President Bartlet is tested by his biggest scandal yet, but The West Wing's approval ratings are way up in a second season that is teeming with dramas on a national scale and burning with an idealistic fervor that will have viewers cheering."


=== Accolades ===
The second season received 18 Emmy Award nominations for the 53rd Primetime Emmy Awards, winning a total of 8 awards. Consecutive wins included Outstanding Drama Series, Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series (Allison Janney), Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series (Thomas Schlamme for "In the Shadow of Two Gunmen"), and Outstanding Cinematography for a Single Camera Series (Thomas Del Ruth). Bradley Whitford won for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, and the series also won for Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series, Outstanding Single Camera Picture Editing for a Series, and  Outstanding Single Camera Sound Mixing for a Series. Notable nominations included Martin Sheen and Rob Lowe for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series, John Spencer and Richard Schiff for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, Stockard Channing for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series, Oliver Platt for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series, Aaron Sorkin for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for "In the Shadow of Two Gunmen", and Laura Innes for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for "Shibboleth".
Thomas Del Ruth won an award from the American Society of Cinematographers for the episode "Noël".


== References ==


== External links ==
The West Wing at IMDb
West Wing Episode Guide