"BLINK" Summary and Synopsis

Young photographer Sally Sparrow breaks into an old house (Wester Drumlins) and takes photos of fallen chandeliers and moss growing in fireplaces. Entering a room upstairs, she sees peeling wallpaper and the letters "BE" exposed underneath. She pulls back the corner and finds the message "BEWARE OF THE WEEPING ANGELS". She tears off more wallpaper, revealing a message telling her to beware of the Weeping Angels, and telling her to "duck, Sally Sparrow." It is only when she reveals the words "duck now" that she actually does so, narrowly avoiding a rock that would have hit her head. She looks out the window, from where the rock was thrown and sees the statue of an angel with its hands covering its eyes. She peels the rest of the wallpaper off to reveal the writer of the message — "Love from the Doctor, 1969."
Sally appears to return home, looking into her living room; there are numerous televisions; they show a man with glasses, although, on one screen, a young woman is butting into the scene. The man tells the viewer not to turn away, not to look away, and not to blink — "Blink and you're dead." Sally calls her best friend Kathy Nightingale, despite the late hour; she answers, groggily, but refuses to leave her home.
It's then revealed that Sally is in Kathy's home, having been given a key. Annoyed, Kathy gets ready to greet her friend; however, upon hearing the toilet, Kathy asks if Sally has met her brother, warning her that she's about to. Sally turns to the hall to see Kathy's naked brother, Larry, who desperately hoped he was wearing pants. Kathy walks in, shouting at Larry to get to bed; she then notices Sally isn't concerned by this, asking her what's wrong.
The next morning, Kathy and Sally return to the house; Kathy has a laugh that they are acting like detectives. Sally shows Kathy the message on the wall and the Weeping Angel but thinks it is now closer to the house than before. Someone rings the doorbell; Sally answers it, and Kathy waits in the room where the writing on the wall is - "in case of incidents". Sally answers the door to discover a man who is looking for her. He says that he was told to come to this place on this exact date and time and give Sally Sparrow a letter. As Kathy spies on the conversation from in the room, she fails to notice the Weeping Angel moving whenever it isn't in sight; lowering its hands from its eyes, and creeping into the room and upon Kathy from behind.
When Sally asks the man who sent him, he replies that it was his grandmother, Katherine Wainwright, who specified that he explains that before marriage, she was known as Kathy Nightingale. At that moment, the door to the room Kathy is in slams shut. Sally calls to Kathy, which the man assumes is her wondering if he said the right name; he restates her full name, Katherine Costello Nightingale. Sally presumes she has figured out the joke and calls for her friend, but Kathy does not answer. When she goes back into the room where she left her, Kathy has completely vanished, and the Angel is back in its original spot and position outside.
Elsewhere, Kathy gets up in a field and asks a local lad where she is. He replies that she is in Hull, but she refuses to believe it until he shows her the local newspaper, which not only confirms her location but also shows the year to be 1920.
Back at Wester Drumlins, the man has become upset; he promised to fulfil this task for his grandmother, Kathy Wainwright, who died in 1987. This persuades Sally to take the letter, who reads it; this man is indeed Kathy's grandson, who swore to fulfil her last request. In anger, Sally flings down the letter and heads upstairs, only to find three more Weeping Angels. One of them has a Yale key in its hand. She takes it and heads out, only to find Kathy's grandson leaving with his promise fulfilled. As Sally leaves, she fails to notice the Angels uncovering their eyes and watching her as she takes the key and leaves.
In a coffee shop, Sally reads the letter fully, learning Kathy led a full and happy life, with Ben, the first person she met in Hull with a family. She includes photographs of her and her children (with her daughter named after Sally), and grandchildren. Sally reads Kathy's joke about living to an exceptionally old age and her request to tell Larry, who works at a local DVD shop, something; her parents are gone by this time, so he's really her only close family. Sally goes to Kathy's grave to pay her respects to her dead friend (having a laugh that Kathy lied to Ben, claiming to have been younger than she was), then leaves for the DVD shop. Sally fails to notice one of the Angels from Wester Drumlins spying on her in the graveyard.
When Sally gets to the DVD shop, she goes into the back to find Larry. She, unconvincingly, explains to him that Kathy has had to go away due to work and that it's nothing to worry about. She also honours her friend's request to tell her brother that she loves him. Larry smiles at that and then wonders if that's an indication that something is wrong with her or whether it is all just a joke but Sally assures him that everything is fine. She sees the man with glasses who was giving the blinking warning on the screens in the Nightingale's flat on a TV which Larry has been studying. He explains that the man is an Easter egg found on seventeen DVDs and no one, not even the manufacturers or the publishers, knows how it got there. He simply sits there and makes random remarks; it's like listening to half a conversation. Larry and his internet friends have been constantly trying to figure out the other half. As he and Sally are talking, the DVD keeps un-pausing itself, and the man with glasses continues with his random phrases, two of which fit with Sally comments; much to her shock. In the end, Larry gives her a list of the seventeen DVDs that have the Easter egg on them. She leaves the shop, having gotten an idea from a comment said by Larry's co-worker ("Why does nobody ever just go to the police?") about what to do next.
Sally goes to the police station, and mentions the house's name. While waiting, she sees two of the Angels on the church across the street. While watching them, she blinks and they have disappeared. She doesn't see that they are now above the window she is looking out of. She then meets DI Billy Shipton. He shows her a collection of cars with something strange in common: all of them were found outside the Wester Drumlins house (some with their motors still running) and all of their owners vanished without a trace. He shows her a fake police phone box, with a lock that will not open. Billy charms Sally to give him her mobile number before she leaves. After she leaves, Billy finds the Weeping Angels have appeared in the room with him, surrounding the phone box. While examining them closely, he blinks.
Outside, Sally finds the key she took from the Angel's hand in her coat pocket. She heads back to the garage to try it out, but Billy and the police box have gone, and the outside door is broken. Someone has broken through it with great force.
Billy gets up to see the Doctor and Martha, who tell him he is in 1969, because of the "touch of an Angel"; most likely the same one as he is in the same year that they are. The Doctor advises him not to go swimming for an hour as time travel without a capsule is disorientating. He remarks that the Weeping Angels are the only psychopaths that "kill you nicely"; they send their victims into the past and feed off the days they might have had. Billy does not understand any of this but Martha advises him to nod when the Doctor stops for breath. The Doctor explains to Billy how he found him by showing off his Timey-wimey detector - a modified lunch box, which detects when someone comes from a different time - "and can cook an egg from 20 paces, whether you want it to or not." Because of this, he actively avoids chickens, as it's not pretty when they blow up. The Doctor explains that normally, he would have offered Billy a ride home; however, someone's nicked his motor. After they talk, the Doctor asks Billy to give Sally Sparrow a message and apologises that it will take "a while" to get the message through.
Back in the present, Sally gets a phone call. She goes to visit an old and dying Billy at the hospital. They have a laugh that Billy managed to marry a Sally, who has already passed away. Billy goes on to explain that he often thought of contacting her before tonight, but says it would have "torn a hole in the fabric of space and time and destroyed two thirds of the universe." She asks where he got that from and he replies there was a man he met in 1969 called the Doctor who asked him to pass on a message to her - "look at the list". She is not sure what this means and he says that it's a list of seventeen DVDs. Billy reveals that he didn't stay a policeman back in the '70s; he instead got into publishing, then videos and eventually DVDs. Sally realises that he was the one who put the Easter eggs on the DVDs. She is curious as to how the Doctor knew she had the list considering she has not had it long. Billy replies that he asked the Doctor but he couldn't tell him; only saying that she would understand one day, but that he won't. She offers to come and tell him once she has figured it out but he solemnly says that the Doctor told him that this would be their last meeting before he dies. She decides to stay with him until the end. He thanks her and says he only has until the rain stops.
After the rain has stopped, Sally calls Larry. She has realised what the DVDs on "the list" all have in common: they are all owned by her; specifically, they are the only DVDs that she owns, which means that the Easter egg is meant for her though he is more shocked by the fact she only owns seventeen DVDs. She ignores this and asks him meet her at Wester Drumlins and to bring a portable DVD player.
Larry does so and brings two copies of the DVD. One has a slightly better picture but he opts for the one with the best sound. They play it and see the full message from the Doctor. He makes the same random comments from the video store, but now they fit perfectly into what Larry and Sally are saying. Realising this, Sally thinks he can hear them, but Larry explains that he always says it and that he has got a transcript of the Easter egg with him. As the Doctor gives his message, everything Sally says seems to fit in, so Larry, now very excited, begins to add her words to the transcript.
The Doctor mentions that he has a copy of the transcript on his autocue. That is how he knows what she is saying. He warns of creatures from another world, the "Lonely Assassins", aka the Weeping Angels. They are incredibly fast, and they can send people back in time, which is how he got stuck in 1969. These aliens have a unique defence mechanism: they are "quantum locked"; they do not exist when they are being watched. If any living thing looks at the Angels, they immediately turn to stone until they are no longer looked at. This explains the "weeping"; they cannot look at each other since it has the same effect. "Their greatest asset is their greatest curse". They are looking to get into the TARDIS, which contains a world of time energy, which the Angels could feast on forever but the damage they could do could switch off the sun. And since Sally has the key, the Angels are after her now.
The Doctor is stuck in 1969, so he is relying on Sally to send the TARDIS back to him. When she asks how, he states that he has run out of transcript, but he can guess why: he surmises that the Weeping Angels are closing in, forcing her to flee and so left the transcript unfinished. Indeed, Larry has stopped writing. He says what Sally has already heard; she must keep her gaze on the Angels; she mustn't turn away, look away, or even blink – the Angels can move with incredible speed when unobserved; "Blink and you're dead." Once the message has ended, Sally screams for the Doctor not to go so Larry offers to rewind it but that would be of no use. They both realise at the same time that neither is looking at the Weeping Angel anymore. They look up. The Angel is now in the room with them, baring sharp teeth in a savage snarl and outstretching clawed fingers towards them.
As a terrified Larry keeps his eyes fixed on the Angel to stop it getting any closer, Sally searches for a way out. As she tries all the doors in the house, only to find the Angels have locked them in while they were watching the Doctor's message, Larry is growing increasingly restless and fearful that the other Angels could come up behind him. Larry turns around for a split second, and the Angel moves to right in front of him. Keeping his eyes on it, he slowly backs out of the room. Sally finds an unlocked door to the cellar, and calls out to Larry to give him the news. Larry willingly flees to rejoin with Sally.
Larry and Sally descend into the cellar to find a way out. They find the TARDIS, along with the other three Weeping Angels. They head towards the door, keeping their eyes on the Angels. As they get to the TARDIS, the fourth Angel has appeared by the stairs and is pointing at the light. The light starts to flicker, and Sally and Larry realise in horror that the Angel is draining the light so that the Angels will be able to attack in the darkness. With each flicker, the Angels move towards Sally and Larry with their claws out and their teeth showing, as they frantically try to unlock the TARDIS door. At the last second, they open it and flee inside and lock the Angels out just in time.
As the two look around at the TARDIS interior in amazement, a hologram of the Doctor activates and says that the TARDIS has detected an authorised control disc, valid for one journey only. It is the other copy of the DVD that Larry brought, which is now glowing. But the Angels outside begin shaking the TARDIS on each side, looking for a way in. Larry puts the DVD into the console and the TARDIS begins to dematerialise. But as the TARDIS begins to fade away around them, Sally realises the TARDIS is leaving, but she and Larry are not going with it. She screams at the Doctor to help them, even as the TARDIS fades, leaving them crouching in the middle of the circle of Angels. Sally yells to keep looking at them, but Larry stands up slowly and realises that the Doctor tricked the Angels - they've been left looking straight at each other, freezing them permanently.A year later, Sally and Larry are running the DVD store together but Sally cannot let all that has happened to them go as she still doesn't know how the Doctor got all the information he possessed. Sally is shown to now have everything she recorded, including the transcript, the photos of the wall and the list of DVDs in a folder which she keeps on her at all times. Larry subtly hints that her obsession with this is preventing them from having a relationship but she insists that they merely run a shop together. He then goes out to get some milk. Sally then glances outside as a taxi pulls up and the Doctor and Martha get out. She rushes over to talk to them, only to find that the Doctor doesn't recognise her as the events of her past are still in his future. Sally suddenly realises that she is the one who gives the Doctor the information he needs to retrieve the TARDIS and save her from the Weeping Angels. Sally then hands over the folder telling him that, at some point, he's going to be stuck in 1969 and he'll need to ensure he has it on him when he is. The Doctor is in a rush, still in the middle of another adventure, but asks Sally's name and tells her its nice to meet her. Larry returns right at that moment with the milk and can only stare at the Doctor and Martha in stunned amazement. The Doctor is in a hurry and cannot stay, so he and Martha eventually head off to take care of "four things and a lizard", while Sally clasps Larry's hand and goes back into the shop, Sparrow and Nightingale's antiquarian books and rare DVDs.
However, the scene shifts to montage across the public statuary, punctuated with the Doctor's recorded warnings, as though to warn us that there might be other Angels lurking among the statues...
"Blink and you're dead. Don't turn your back. Don't look away. And DON'T. BLINK. Good luck."

Cast
The Doctor - David Tennant
Martha Jones - Freema Agyeman
Sally Sparrow - Carey Mulligan
Kathy Nightingale - Lucy Gaskell
Larry Nightingale - Finlay Robertson
Malcolm Wainwright - Richard Cant
Billy Shipton - Michael Obiora
Old Billy - Louis Mahoney
Ben Wainwright - Thomas Nelstrop
Banto - Ian Boldsworth
Desk Sergeant - Ray Sawyer
Uncredited Cast
Weeping Angels - Agnieszka Błońska, Elen Thomas [2][3]
Waitress - Sian Warrilow

Worldbuilding
While trapped in 1969, the Doctor builds a timey-wimey detector that "goes ding when there's stuff".
It is assembled from items including a Blackpool postcard.
The Weeping Angels are quantum locked, meaning that they cannot move when within anyone's sight.
When Kathy calls her and Sally "Sparrow and Nightingale", Sally says it's "a bit ITV."
Larry compares Wester Drumlins to "Scooby Doo's house".
Sally's disc triggers Security Protocol 712 in the TARDIS.
The Doctor and Martha are heading to "Red Hatching".
Sally has a UK driver's licence, which states that she was born in England.
Larry has a sticker on one of his files advertising "Cunard White Star to Europe".
DVD's on display at Banto's DVD store include Dance of Days, Falling Star, Mean Teens, Civilization Zero and Banana Shots. Posters are shown for DVDs including Acid Burn, Candy Kane and City Justice.
A Palm Beach Bar inflatable is on display in the back room of Banto's.
Sally and Larry own a shop called Sparrow & Nightingale.
On the same street as Sparrow & Nightingale are Shapes Hair, Josef's Hair Stylist and a Newsagent's shop which advertises Wall's and the National Lottery.

## Continuity Notes
1. **Introduction of Weeping Angels:** The episode introduces the Weeping Angels, significant in the lore of the series.
2. **Doctor-Lite Structure:** "Blink" is categorized as a "Doctor-lite" episode, allowing for simultaneous filming of other episodes.
3. **Bootstrap Paradox:** The episode engages with the bootstrap paradox, as the Doctor communicates with Sally through future messages.
4. **Connection to Previous Lore:** Based on a short story by Moffat, enhancing the episode's depth.
5. **Recurring Themes:** Explores time, the relationship between past and future, and fear.
6. **Cinematic Influence:** Praised for its visual style and horror portrayal, influencing later episodes.
7. **Critical Acclaim and Legacy:** Often cited as one of the best episodes, contributing to the Weeping Angels' legacy.
8. **Foreshadowing Future Episodes:** The Weeping Angels return in later seasons, cementing their place in the Doctor Who mythos.
## Cultural Context Notes
1. **Overview:** "Blink" redefined storytelling in science fiction, focusing on Sally rather than the Doctor.
2. **Cultural References:** The Weeping Angels symbolize the fear of the unknown and time's fluidity.
3. **Historical Context:** Reflects the early 2000s' complex narratives and post-9/11 anxieties about surveillance.
4. **Cultural Impact:** Won the 2008 Hugo Award; serves as a standalone narrative for new viewers.
5. **Viewer Reception:** Consistently ranks as a top episode among fans, notable for its suspense and structure.
6. **Intertextuality:** Engages with horror and thriller conventions, creating a rich narrative tapestry.
## Production Notes
- **Filming Locations:** Wester Drumlins was filmed at Fields House in Newport; additional scenes at Coal Exchange and Mount Stuart Square in Cardiff Bay.
- **Casting:** Carey Mulligan's performance as Sally Sparrow received acclaim for depth and character.
- **Special Effects:** Innovative effects used to portray the Weeping Angels, enhancing the episode's horror.
- **Production Challenges:** Considered a "Doctor-Lite" episode, leading to a tight production schedule.
- **Broadcast and Reception:** First aired to 6.1 million viewers, praised for writing and direction.
## Reception Notes
**Viewership Data:**  
- High ratings during initial airing; ranked second in fan polls.
**Critical Reception:**  
- Acclaimed for originality and suspense, with critics noting its clever plot and horror elements.
**Fan Reactions:**  
- Highly rated on IMDb (9.8/10); often considered an ideal introduction for new viewers.

ORIGINAL SCRIPT DRAFT:

Blink
Written by Steven Moffat
---
EXT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE - NIGHT
Big forbidding gates.          Wrought iron, the works. A big
modern padlock on.
Through the gates, an old house.             Ancient, crumbling,
overgrown.      Once beautiful - still beautiful in decay.
Panning along: on the gates - DANGER, KEEP OUT, UNSAFE
STRUCTURE --
The gates are shaking, like someone is climbing them --
-- and then a figure drops into a view on the other side.
Straightens up into a close-up.
SALLY SPARROW.       Early twenties, very pretty, just a bit
mad, just a bit dangerous.           She's staring at the house,
eyes shining.       Big naughty grin.
                           
SALLY
              Sexy!
And she starts marching up the long gravel drive ...
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY - NIGHT
The big grand house in darkness, huge sweeping staircase,
shuttered window, debris everywhere --
One set of shutters buckles from an impact from the inside,
splinters.
SALLY SPARROW, kicking her away in --
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY/ROOMS - NIGHT
SALLY, clutching a camera.           Walks from one room to another.
Takes a photograph.
Her face: fascinated, loving this creepy old place.                    Takes
another photograph.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CONSERVATORY ROOM - NIGHT
In the conservatory now - the windows looking out on a
darkened garden.        And a patch of rotting wallpaper catches
SALLY'S eye.                                                        2.

High on the wall, just below the picture rail, a corner of
wallpaper is peeling away, drooping mournfully down from
the wall - revealing writing on the plaster behind.                 Just two
letters we can see - BE - the beginning of a word --
She reaches up on tiptoes and pulls at the hanging frond of
wallpaper.
The whole word revealed:
BEWARE
And on this word, dramatic chords: ludicrous, over the top,
like from a cheesy old horror movie. Sally pulls out her mobile phone and silences the music by
answering it.
                           SALLY
              Hello?
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. PUB - NIGHT
Corner of noisy pub, KATHY, phone at her ear, finger in the
other one.
                           KATHY
              Sally Sparrow, you promised you'd
              come.    It's Saturday night, we
              need to be here!
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CONSERVATORY ROOM - NIGHT
SALLY'S eyes are still on the word BEWARE.                 Eyes gleaming,
alive to the mystery. [Intercut between PUB and
CONSERVATORY as necessary].
                           SALLY
              Why?
                           KATHY
              Because we don't have boyfriends
              and we're going to die!
                           SALLY
              We're what??
                           KATHY
              Well, you know, one day.


                           SALLY
              G'night, Kathy!
Sally, laughing, clicks off the phone.               Looks at the
revealed word.       Frowns.
Beware?     Beware what?
She pulls at the wallpaper again.              It tears along
horizontally, revealing more --

BEWARE THE WEEPING
Frowns?     The weeping?       She rips further.        One more word.
The completed message reads ...

BEWARE THE WEEPING ANGEL
What does that mean??
There's more writing below this - the topmost fragment of a
letter is poking up into the torn-off area.                 She pulls the
next strip off, revealing more words written just below.

OH, AND DUCK.
Sally stares.       Duck??
Pulls off the next strip down on the off chance.                   And
reveals:

NO, REALLY, DUCK!
What??
Seriously puzzled now, she pulls off the next strip.

SALLY SPARROW, DUCK, NOW!!
She's jolted back a step.           Her own name on the wall.
Impossible.
On her face, the thoughts clicking through her head.                    Duck?
Duck!!
And she ducks!
Glass smashes behind her, something hurtles through the air
over her head, smashes into the wall where the writing is.
Just a rock, a big stone - but it would've knocked her
cold.    It bounces to the floor.


She flashes her torch towards the broken windows.                   Is
anyone there, who was that??
And her torch beam lands on a silent figure standing just
beyond the windows of the conservatory.
Sally startles, someone's out there --
-- then realises she's looking at --
AN ANCIENT STONE STATUE, standing tall and thin and solemn
in the overgrown garden - ancient, weather-beaten, stained
and mottled by a hundred years of rain.                Its head is bowed,
and its face is buried in its hands, like it's lamenting.
Or weeping ...
Weeping!
         writing --Sally looks back to the first line of the wall
BEWARE THE WEEPING ANGEL
-- back to the statue.
                       as far as she can see --She peers around the stone figure,
-- there are a pair of folded wings on its back.                   It's an
angel.     A weeping angel!
She stands, cautiously approaches the windows.                  Flashes her
torch round the overgrown garden.              No one else around.
Just the statue.
And weirdly, impossibly it's standing in exactly the right
position to have thrown the rock.
What??
Looks back to writing.          Lands her torchbeam on her own
name??     How is any of this possible??
She rips the next sheet off:

LOVE FROM THE DOCTOR (1969)


INT.    KATHY'S FLAT. HALLWAY - NIGHT
SALLY, coming through the door.             Tired, still a little
jumpy, still pulling herself together.               She leans back
against the door, closes her eyes for a moment --
-- and on the very moment her eyes close, we hear --

                           THE DOCTOR (OOV)
              Your life depends on this:           don't
              blink!
She startles.       What??     Where did that come from?
Her view of the hallway.           The door to the living room
stands open, blue television light flickers eerily out of
it.
                           THE DOCTOR (OOV) (CONT'D)
              Don’t even blink.        Blink and
              you’re dead.
She moves forward to the living room doorway, looks through
it.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. KATHY'S FLAT. LIVING ROOM - NIGHT
On the big widescreen telly in the corner - THE DOCTOR.
A simple newsreader shot, he's talking directly to the
camera.
                           THE DOCTOR
              They're fast, faster than you can
              believe.     Don't turn your back,
              don't look away, and don't blink.                                
SALLY stares at him - bemused, but no more than mildly
curious.
              Good luck!THE DOCTOR (CONT'D)
The screen winks out, going blank.
Sally looks round the room, increasingly bemused.
... a computer sits on a desk.             On the monitor, a freeze-
frame of the Doctor, clearly at a different point in his
conversation...
Panning along.       On a table a jumble of portable DVD
players, all different makes and sizes -
-- but frozen on all of them, in very slightly different
moments of what is clearly the same speech - the Doctor.
In one of them, a woman we recognise as MARTHA has poked
her head into shot.                                                            
Sally: no idea what to make of this, doesn't much care
either.     She moves off, heading out to the kitchen.


We pan off the doorway to a pair of bare feet.                  They are
sticking out from under a duvet on the couch.                  And there's
snoring ...
... we pan along a body hunched under the duvet, a mop of
hair ...
... to a laptop computer, open on the table at the end of
the sofa.      Again the Doctor's face in chatty freeze frame.
We close in on this as we hear --
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. KATHY'S FLAT. BEDROOM - NIGHT
-- a bedside phone ringing, then snatched up.                  KATHY, in
bed.
                           KATHY
              Hello?
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. KATHY'S FLAT. KITCHEN - NIGHT
SALLY, making two coffees, phone tucked under her chin.
[Intercut between BEDROOM and KITCHEN as necessary]
                           SALLY
              Bit freaked, need to talk. Making
              you a coffee.
                           KATHY
              It's one in the morning.          You
              think I'm coming round at one in
              the morning??
                           SALLY
              Nope.
What??     Kathy gets it.       Looks to her bedroom door - the
light is clearly on the hall.            Damn it, she's here!
                           KATHY
              Oh God!                                       (New thought, more
                     alarm)
              Oh God!!     Sally, you've met my
              brother, Larry, haven't you?
                           SALLY
              No.
                           KATHY
              You're about to.


Sally looks round.
Standing in the doorway, bleary-eyed, naked (at least from
the waist up, that's all we can see) is LARRY.                  Early
twenties, probably good looking in better moments.
He stares at Sally.
Sally stares at him.
                           LARRY
              Okay.    Not sure, but really,
              really hoping ...        Pants?
Sally looks at him regretfully.
                           SALLY
              Nope.
Kathy: listening, cringes for England.
Larry: just nods, soberly.
                           LARRY
              Okay.
And he goes.       We hold on the doorway, as Kathy goes belting
past it, in pursuit of her brother.
                           KATHY
                   (From off; yelling)
              Put them on!!       Put them on, I
              hate you!!      What were you
              thinking??      Sally Sparrow doesn't
              have a boyfriend - she could've
              torn you limb from limb!
A door slam!       Kathy reappears in the kitchen doorway.
                           KATHY (CONT'D)
              Sorry, my useless brother!           Only
              been here three days - the fridge
              is empty and everything smells of
              feet.
And she registers that Sally is a little shaken.
                           KATHY (CONT'D)
              Sally!    What's wrong?       What’s
              happened?


EXT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE - DAY
The gates, the keep out signs.             As before, a figure drops
into shot the other side of the gates - SALLY.
Then another - KATHY.
                           KATHY
              Okay, let's investigate!          You and
              me, girl investigators, love it!
Sally starts leading the way to the house.
                           KATHY (CONT'D)
              Hey!    Sparrow and Nightingale!
              That so works!
                           SALLY
              Bit ITV.
                           KATHY
                   (Taking that at as a
                     compliment)
              I know!
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CONSERVATORY ROOM - DAY
It's not a lot less creepy by day.              KATHY is looking
around, not impressed.          SALLY is examining the writing on
the wall.
                           KATHY
              What were you here for anyway?
              Everyone says this place is
              haunted.
                           SALLY
              Haunted and beautiful.          I love
              old things.      They make me feel
              sad.
                           KATHY
              What's good about sad?
                           SALLY
              It's happy for deep people.
Sally has crossed to the windows, looking out on THE
WEEPING ANGEL.       The thin, lamenting figure, stone face
buried in stone hands.
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              The weeping angel...

Kathy: wrinkles her nose - not impressed, slightly
repulsed.
                           KATHY
              Wouldn't have that in my garden.
              It's moved.SALLY
Sally is walking back and forward, squinting at the statue
from different angles.
              It's what?KATHY
                           SALLY
              Since yesterday, I'm sure of it.
              It's closer.
                           the house ...!It's got closer to
Sally's eyes go back to the words on the wall:

BEWARE THE WEEPING ANGEL.
Her eyes travel down the wall - and we pan with her - to --
-- LOVE FROM THE DOCTOR --
-- and on the very moment we reach the signature --
Ding dong.      The doorbell!
They exchange a look.          What?? Sally goes to the
conservatory door, peers out.
Sally's POV.
             spacious hall.The front door, at the other end of the wide,
The door has frosted glass, there's a shadow on it.                    A man,
tall, thin ... could even be the Doctor.
Kathy is at Sally's shoulder, keeps her voice to a whisper.
                           KATHY
              Who'd come here?
                           SALLY
              Never mind that.        Who lives here?
              That was an electric doorbell.
Curious, Sally reaches behind her, clicks the ancient light
switch in the conservatory --
-- and the conservatory lights come on!
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              Someone's paying the bills.

Kathy - worried now - snaps the light off again --
-- and grabs Sally, who's heading out into the hallway.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY - DAY
                           KATHY
              What are you doing??         It could be
              a burglar!
                           SALLY
              A burglar who rings the
              doorbell??
                           KATHY
              Okay, I'll stay here in case of --
                           SALLY
              In case of what?
              Incidents.KATHY
                           SALLY
              Okay.
KATHY ducks back into the conservatory room, SALLY at the
door now.      Bolted, big rusty bolts.          She reaches for them,
shoots them both.
Sally's face: a moment of hesitation.
The shadow on the frosted glass: without making a big thing
of it, it could be the Doctor.
She opens the door.
Standing there: MALCOLM.           Mid-forties, shy and reserved
looking, a bit formal, bit old fashioned.                He's wearing a
suit, and probably always does.              He's clearly nervous, bit
unsure of himself --
-- which is all Sally needs!
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              Hello, can I help you?
                           MALCOLM
              Sorry.    I'm ... I'm looking for
              Sally Sparrow.
On Sally: this impacts.
On Kathy: listening from just inside the conservatory door.


                                                                                                  SALLY
                                                    How did you know I'd be here?
Malcolm has reached inside his jacket, now produces what
seems to he an ancient envelope - old and yellow.
Hesitates.
                                                                                                  MALCOLM
                                                    I was told to bring this letter,
                                                    on this date, at this exact time,
                                                    to Sally Sparrow.
                                                                                                  SALLY
                                                    It’s looks old.
                                                    It is old.MALCOLM                                                                                                                                         I’m sorry, do you
                                                    have anything with a photograph
                                                    on it?                             Like a driving licence?
On Sally, incredulous --
                                                                                                                                                                                             CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CONSERVATORY ROOM - DAY
At the conservatory door, KATHY, listening, equally bemused
--
-- a movement from behind her - the flicker of shadow, the
scrape of a foot --
-- she spins, looks.                                                                                      The room as it was, nothing changed.
Kathy: frowns, was there something?                                                                                                                                  Takes a few steps into
the room, glances over at --
-- the weeping angel, still and silent in the garden, face
plunged in its hands.                                                                                          There's nothing here, nothing
moving.
She turns heads back to the doorway --
And as she clears frame, we are left with THE WEEPING ANGEL
-
-- and its hands are now gone from its face, and it's
looking right at her. (NB.                                                                                                              We DON'T see the movement -
just the result of it.)
Closer on the angel.                                                                                      A round, angelic face, eyes that are
blank ovals of stone ...


INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY - DAY
At the door, MALCOLM is studying Sally's photograph.                 He
even holds the little photograph - a little apologetically -
next to SALLY'S face.
                           MALCOLM
              I'm sorry, I feel really stupid,
              but I was told to make absolutely
              sure.    It's so hard to tell with
              these little photographs, isn't
              it?
                                                              CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CONSERVATORY ROOM - DAY
On KATHY listening at the door, equally puzzled.
              Apparently.SALLY (OOV)
Kathy shifts position slightly, trying to see the guy at
the door --
-- and we see behind her that THE WEEPING ANGEL is now
standing right outside the window, right up close to the
glass, its blank stone eyes fixed on her --
                                                              CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY - DAY
MALCOLM is handing SALLY back her back her driving licence.
Then hesitates with the envelope - like it's a big duty to
discharge and he's a bit self-conscious.
                           MALCOLM
              Well!    Here we go, I suppose.
              Funny feeling, after all these
              years.
He holds out the ancient envelope.
Sally eyes it.       Chilled somehow.
                           SALLY
                   (Not taking it)
              Who's it from?
                           MALCOLM
              Well that's a long story actually
              --
                           SALLY
              Gimme a name.


On KATHY: she steps closer, into the hallway to hear the
answer --
                                                                                                                                                                                            CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CONSERVATORY ROOM - DAY
-- revealing THE WEEPING ANGEL standing now in the room,
only inches behind her, one arm stretched out, as if
reaching for her!                                                                               (NB.              Again, we never see a movement,
it's always a frozen thing when we see it.)
                                                                                                                                                                                            CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY - DAY
                                                                                                        MALCOLM
                                                    Katherine Wainright.                                                                               But she
                                                    specified I should tell you that
                                                    prior to her marriage, her name
                                                    was Kathy Nightingale.
Sally: stares.                                                                   What??
And wham!
Sally spins!                                                           The door to the conservatory has slammed,
like it's been sucked shut by a draft.                                                                                                                                   But more than a
draft.                                  For the briefest moment there's a distant whooshing
noise, a howling, something being sucked away.                                                                                                                                            And there
is no sign of Kathy.
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    Kathy?
                                                    Kathy, yes.MALCOLM                                                                                                                                       Katherine Costello
                                                    Nightingale.
Sally turns to look at him again.                                                                                                                               Smiles.
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    This a joke?
                                                                                                        MALCOLM
                                                    A joke?
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                                         (Calling to the closed
                                                                              door)
                                                    Kathy, is this you?                                                                           Very funny!
She's gone to the door to the conservatory, now enters --


INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CONSERVATORY ROOM - DAY
-- the room is deserted.           SALLY looks round bemused.
In the garden outside: THE WEEPING ANGEL, back as it was
before, face plunged in its hands.
                           SALLY
              Kathy?
                                                                 CUT TO:

OMITTED

INT. FIELD - DAY 'A'
Close on KATHY as she springs up into shot.
She's in a field.          She's crouched there, like she just
landed, very suddenly.          Breathing hard, dazed, seemingly in
shock.
She straightens up.         Trees, fields, grass.          And cows.
She's in a field with cows.            Nothing remains of where she
was.    No buildings, just fields and trees and farmland.
She turns.      A fence.     BEN, twenties, a farmhand in a cap
and working clothes sitting on the fence, reading a paper,
munching an apple.         Good looking, cheeky smile.
She stares at him groggily for a few seconds --
-- till he glances up.          And stares back at her.
A little shakily, she starts towards him ...
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY STAIRS - DAY
SALLY is standing on the stairs, calling up them.                   MALCOLM
is looking up at her in confusion.
                           SALLY
              Kathy?    Kathy?
                           MALCOLM
              Please.
She looks down at him.          He is proffering the letter.
                           MALCOLM (CONT'D)
              You need to take this.          I
              promised.


Sally's eyes go to the letter.                                                                                                    What is this, what's
happening?
                                                                                                                                                                CUT TO:

EXT. FIELD - DAY 'A'
KATHY is approaching BEN on the fence.
                                                    Excuse me.KATHY                                                                                                              Where am I?
                                                                                                   BEN
                                                    You're in the cow field.
                                                                                                   KATHY
                                                    What cow field?                                                Why are there
                                                    cows??                              What's that about, cows??
                                                    I was in London, I was in the
                                                    middle of London.
                                                                                                   BEN
                                                    You're in Hull.
                                                                                                   KATHY
                                                    No, I'm not.
                                                                                                   BEN
                                                    This is Hull.
                                                                                                   KATHY
                                                    No it isn't.
                                                                                                   BEN
                                                    You're in Hull.
                                                                                                   KATHY
                                                    I'm not in Hull, stop saying
                                                    Hull.
A little nervously, the MAN proffers the newspaper he's
reading ... (this scene should mirror Sally approaching the
proffered letter.)
                                                    Hull.                          See?BEN
                                                                                                                                                                CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY STAIRS - DAY
MALCOLM is handing the letter to SALLY (again mirroring Ben
proffering the newspaper to Kathy ...)
Sally holds the letter gingerly.                                                                                                            Something awful is
happening, she can feel it.


                           SALLY
              Who are you?      Why are you here?
                           MALCOLM
              I made a promise.
                           SALLY
              Who to?
              My grandmother.                                                   MALCOLMKatherine
              Costello Nightingale.
Sally is staring at him.           Rocked now.      Something about the
man's sincerity - there's something terrible here.
                                                                 CUT TO:

EXT. FIELD - DAY 'A'
BEN is handing the paper to KATHY.              Kathy takes it, looks
at it.
An old fashioned newspaper.            The masthead: The Hull Times.
                           BEN
              Don't have that in London, no
              call for it.      It's all Hull.
On Kathy, staring, bemused.            Then frowning --
-- Kathy's POV, the newspaper.             Zooming in on the date --
-- 5th December 1920 --
-- right on the year, till it fills the screen:

OMITTED

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY STAIRS - DAY
                           SALLY
              Your grandmother??
                           MALCOLM
              Yes.    She died twenty years ago.
On Sally. Wha-?
And then --
-- she laughs.
                           MALCOLM (CONT'D)
              I don't see why that's funny.


                           SALLY
              It's your joke!
She has taken the letter, rips open the envelope.                   A thick
handwritten letter, a bunch of old photographs.
First thing she sees:
And ancient black and white photograph, and staring out of
it, unmistakeably, KATHY NIGHTINGALE.               She's in period
clothes but it's absolutely her.
She flicks through the other photographs.                The same woman,
Kathy, getting older - getting married, holding babies, a
jolly old woman with grandchildren, finally in colour.
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              So they're related?
              I'm sorry?MALCOLM
                           SALLY
              My Kathy, your granny - they're
              practically identical --
She breaks off.        She's staring at the letter -- the opening
few lines, the spidery handwriting of the very old.
                   (V.O.)KATHY
              My Dearest Sally Sparrow.           If my
              grandson has done as he promises
              he will, then as you read these
              words it has been mere minutes
              since we last spoke - for you.
              For me, it has been over sixty
              years.
Sally's face.       What??     What??    Flicking through the letter
now, the many pages.
                   (V.O.)KATHY (CONT'D)
              -- The third of the photographs
              is of my children.        The youngest
              is Sally, I named her after you,
              of course --
Flicks through again.
                   (V.O.)KATHY (CONT'D)
              -- My husband died of influenza
              in 1962 --
Flicking through again, faster, more frantic.


                   (V.O.)KATHY (CONT'D)
              -- You have always loved old
              things, and the past, but in a
              way, dearest Sally, you have
              always been wrong --
Sally looks up at Malcolm, shaking.
              This is sick!!
              sick!!
And she dashes the letter plus photographs to the floor.
Malcolm looks in horror at the scattered documents.
A movement from upstairs.           Sally's head snaps up.
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              Kathy?
And she races up the stairs ...
Malcolm bends to pick up the scattered letter and
photographs ...







             SALLYThis is totally









CUT TO:

                    INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. LANDING - DAY
                    The landing - SALLY emerging onto it.               A skylight of broken
                    windows throws slanting squares of daylight on to a world
                    of peeling plaster and pigeon droppings, and --
                    SALLY looks around, suddenly chilled.
                    Because up here, standing against the walls, looking almost                
                    - almost - like they belong here, there are three more
                    WEEPING ANGELS.
                    These statues are less weatherbeaten, but just as old -
                    maybe they were outside once, and have been moved inside to
                    preserve them.
                    Two of the angels have their faces plunged in their hands,
                    but the third -
                    - the third is still crying or lamenting, but its head is
                    thrown to one side and buried in the crook of its arm.
                    Its other arm hangs free, and gripped in this hand --
                    -- Sally steps closer, looks.

An ordinary Yale key on a loop of ratty old string.
Clearly not part of the statue's design, too modern, too
... well, rubbish.         (It doesn't matter, but if we're smart,
we'll recognise the TARDIS key.)
Sally goes to this statue, looks closer at the dangling
key.
The key - still shiny - and its string are gripped by the
ancient weather-beaten stone hand.              She pulls at the key,
but it is firmly gripped.           She pulls harder.        Still
gripped.
She bends to inspect the key --
-- and we see, beyond her, that all the other statues have
lowered their hands, and turned to look at her!                  (Again, we
do not see the movement - just the result when she bends
out of shot to look at the key.) She yanks at the key - the
string snaps.
She takes the key, turning to hold it up to the light for a
proper look --
-- and in this moment we see that all other angels have
resumed their positions, faces in hands.                (She now has her
back to the angel she took the key from.)
We hold on her, her back to us, as she examines the key --
-- and we see the shadow of a hand creeping up her back!
From down below we hear a door!
                                                                 CUT TO:

EXT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE - DAY
-- very quick shot of MALCOLM striding away from the house -
-
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. LANDING - DAY
-- SALLY startles at the sound of the slamming door, and
immediately heads to the stairs again --
-- leaving us with a shot of the statue right behind
reaching for her with its stone hand.
                           SALLY
              No, wait, hang on!


She races down the stairs.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY STAIRS - DAY
SALLY comes racing down --
-- stops as she sees the letter and photographs now neatly
stacked on the bottom stair.
Hesitates, scoops them up, dashes on --
-- and as she clears frame, we see a pair of stone feet
frozen in the act of descending the stairs behind her.
                                                                 CUT TO:

EXT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE - DAY
SALLY comes dashing out of the house, looks around.                    No
sign of Malcolm.        She hears a car start up, drive off.
She sags.      Damn it!     Stupid!
She sets off towards the gates ...
... we pan up from her, letting her feet crunch away down
the drive ...
... to the windows of the house.             At one of the windows,
three of the WEEPING ANGELS stand, watching her go ...We
pan to the fourth in the garden, also watching her go...
                   (V.O.)KATHY
              I suppose, unless I live to a
              really exceptional old age, I
              will be long gone as you read
              this.
                                                          DISSOLVE TO:

INT. KATHY'S FLAT. BEDROOM - DAY
SALLY sits on Kathy's bed.           All around her, evidence of a
life in progress.        Tights drying on the radiator, a book
open on the bedside table, photos of mad nights in pubs
pinned to the wall.         Sally is reading the letter, now only
half disbelieving - and tears standing in her eyes.
                   (V.O.)KATHY
              Don't feel sorry for me.          I have
              led a good and full life.                                        

                           KATHY (cont'd)
                                         KATHY (cont'd)
              I have loved a good man, and been
              well loved in return.         You would
              have liked Ben - I wish you could
              have met him.
Sally puts the letter down for a moment, picks up one of
the photographs.        A wedding photograph, KATHY AND BEN.
Closer on the photo of Ben, smiling proudly                 He is clearly
the man Kathy was talking to in the cow field.
On Sally, squinting critically at him, making an
assessment, approving --
-- and when we cut back to Ben, he's no longer a
photograph, he's --
                                                                CUT TO:

EXT. COUNTRY LANE - DAY 'A'
-- calling to KATHY.         (We are back by the cow field,
minutes after we last saw them.)
                           BEN
              Where are you going?
Kathy is heading determinedly away down the lane, BEN
following at more of an amble.             We hold our position,
letting them move away from us.
                           KATHY
              Are you following me??
                           BEN
              Yep.
                           KATHY
              Are you going to stop following
              me??
                           BEN
              Nope, don't think so.
And off they go - Kathy stomping in front, Ben ambling
behind - and we slowly:
                                                          DISSOLVE TO:

EXT. GRAVEYARD - DAY
-- a similarly framed shot of SALLY walking towards us,
also seemingly along a country lane, carrying a bunch of
flowers --


-- but as the picture clarifies, we see that it is a
graveyard.
                   (V.O.)KATHY
              You have always loved old things,
              and the past, but in a way,
              dearest Sally, you have always
              been wrong.      The past isn't old.
              That's exactly what the past is
              not.
As we hear these words, we have panned with Sally, to a
close shot of an old grave stone.
                                                          PANNING DOWN          THE WORDS:
In loving memory
Benjamin Wainright (1897 - 1962)
And his loving wife
Katherine Costello Wainright (1902 - 1987)
Over this, we hear:
                   (V.O.)KATHY (CONT'D)
              The past is just like here - but
              everything is new.        Everything is
              brand new.
Sally is places the flowers on her friend's grave.                   She
stands for a moment, looking sadly at the names --
-- then frowns at a detail.
Close on the dates after Kathy's name (1902 - 1987).
                           SALLY
              1902?    You told him you were 18??
                   (Laughs delightedly)
              You lying cow!
Still laughing she turns to go --
-- revealing, perched on the large tomb behind her, looking
completely in place - A WEEPING ANGEL.               Exactly the same
creature as the ones we saw at the house.
A shot of Sally leaving through the graveyard gates --
-- and we can cut back to the Weeping Angel, now watching
her go.

                   (V.O.)KATHY
              My Mum and Dad are gone by your
              time, so really there's only my
              brother, Lawrence, to tell.           He
              works at the DVD store on Queen
              Street.
                                                                 CUT TO:

EXT. BANTO'S DVD STORE - DAY
SALLY is crossing the road to a specialist "Banto's DVD
store - New, Second Hand, and Rare."
                   (V.O.)KATHY
              I don't know what you're going to
              say to him, but I know you'll
              think of something.         Just tell
              him I love him.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. BANTO'S DVD STORE - DAY
SALLY is entering the store.            Typical DVD store - bit
smaller, bit shabbier.
Guy at the till, BANTO, watching a movie on the store
television - clearly an actioner, gunshots and shouting.
He's all gut and tight-teeshirt.
                           SALLY
              Excuse me - I'm looking for
              Lawrence Nightingale.
                           BANTO
                   (Calls through the back)
              Florence!                                       (To Sally)
              Through the back.
He jerks his head at the curtain leading to the back shop.
A little dubiously, Sally moves towards it, pushes through.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. BANTO'S DVD STORE. BACK OF SHOP - DAY
SALLY sees some boxes, a kettle, a fridge, this is a room
for storage and coffee breaks.             No one there.
                           SALLY
              Hello?

                           THE DOCTOR
              Martha!
Sally spins.       The voice comes from a television (hooked up
to a DVD player) in the corner of the room.
That same 'newsreader' shot of THE DOCTOR talking to camera
- but Martha has stuck her head into shot.                                  
                           MARTHA
              Sorry.
She disappears.        The Doctor turns back to the camera,
addressing it directly. It’s as if exchanging remarks with
some other, unseen person.           His comments are non-sequiters,
delivered after gaps during which he's apparently
listening.
                           THE DOCTOR (CONT'D)
              Possibly.
Sally has moved closer to the telly, looking closer at this
man.
              'Fraid so.THE DOCTOR (CONT'D)
She approaches the television strangely compelled by this.
                           THE DOCTOR (CONT'D)
              Thirty eight.
LARRY appears through a door behind her.
                           LARRY
              Oh.   Hello, can I help you?
                           SALLY
              Hi.
              Just a mo.LARRY
Larry has grabbed a remote, paused the DVD.                 He looks at
Sally, realises he recognises her.
                           LARRY (CONT'D)
              Hang on, we met, didn't we --
                           SALLY
              It'll come to you.
                           LARRY
                   (Colours, as he realises
                     who she is)
              OH MY GOD!


                           SALLY
              There it is.
                           LARRY
              Sorry - sorry, again, about that
              whole --
                           SALLY
              Message from your sister.
              Oh!   Okay!LARRY
Sally opens her mouth to speak.             And nothing comes out. How
on Earth does she do this??            The enormity of it is just
impacting on her??
                           LARRY (CONT'D)
              What?    What is it, what's the
              message?
                           SALLY
              She's ... had to go away for a
              bit.
                           LARRY
              Where?
                           SALLY
              Just a work thing, nothing to
              worry about.
                           LARRY
              Okay.
                           SALLY
              And - ...                                       (Flounders)
                           LARRY
              And what?
                           SALLY
                   (Trying to be casual)
              She ... she loves you.
              She what??LARRY
                           SALLY
              She said to say.        Just sort of
              ... mentioned it.        She loves you.
              There, that's nice, isn't it?
                           LARRY
              ... is she ill?


                           SALLY
              No, no.
              Am I ill??LARRY
                           SALLY
              No!
                           LARRY
              Is it a trick??
                           SALLY
              No, she loves you.
On the screen, the Doctor starts up again.
                           THE DOCTOR
              People don't understand time - it
              isn't what you think it is.
                           SALLY
                   (Rounding on the                           television)
              Who is this guy??
                           LARRY
              Sorry, the pause keeps slipping,
              stupid thing --
Larry has grabbed the remote, paused the Doctor again.
                           SALLY
              Last night at Kathy's you had him
              on all those screens. That same
              guy.    Talking about... I dunno,
              blinking or something.
                           LARRY
              Yeah, the bit about blinking's
              great!    I was checking if they
              were all the same.
                           SALLY
              What were the same?         What is
              this, who is he?
                           LARRY
              An easter egg.
              Excuse me?SALLY
                           LARRY
              Like a DVD extra, yeah?          You know
              how they put extras on DVDs -
              documentaries and stuff.                             

                                                                                                        LARRY (cont'd)
                                                                                                                      LARRY (cont'd)
                                                    Sometimes they put on hidden
                                                    ones, they call them easter eggs -
                                                    you have to go looking for them.
                                                    Follow a bunch of clues in the
                                                    menu screens --
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                                         (Losing interest)
                                                    Oh God, why am I even talking
                                                    about this??                                                           What's the matter
                                                    with me??
                                                                                                        LARRY
                                                    What's wrong?
On the screen the Doctor comes back to life again.
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR
                                                    It's complicated.
                                                                                                        LARRY
                                                                         (Grabbing the remote
                                                                              again)
                                                    Sorry -
                                                            actually.it's interesting,                                                                              He's on seventeen
                                                    different DVDs.                                                                       There are
                                                    seventeen totally unrelated DVD
                                                    releases all with him on - always
                                                    hidden away, always a secret.
                                                    Not even the publishers know how
                                                    he got there.                                                               I've spoken to the
                                                    manufacturers, they don't even
                                                    know.                               He's like a ghost DVD
                                                    extra. Just shows up on DVDs
                                                    where he's not supposed to be.
                                                    But only those ones.                                                                             Those
                                                    seventeen.
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    What does he do?
                                                                                                        LARRY
                                                    Just sits there, makes random
                                                    remarks.                                           It's like we're hearing
                                                    half a conversation.
He starts up the player again.
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR
                                                    Very complicated.
                                                                                                        LARRY
                                                    Me and the guys are always trying
                                                    to work out the other half.
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    When you say you and the guys,
                                                    you mean the internet, don't you?


                           LARRY
              How do you know?
                           SALLY
              Spooky, isn't it?
                           BANTO
                   (Calling from off)
              Florence - need you!
                           LARRY
              S'cuse me a sec.
Larry heads out to the front of the shop, leaving Sally
with the Doctor.        She looks curiously at him, intrigued in
spite of herself.
                           THE DOCTOR
              People assume that time is a
              strict progression of cause to
              effect, but actually from a non-
              linear, non-subjective viewpoint,
              it's more like a big ball of
              wibbley-wobbley, timey-wimey
              stuff.
                           SALLY
              Started well, that sentence.
                           THE DOCTOR
                   (Ruefully agreeing)
              It got away from me, yeah.
Sally blinks, stares in confusion.              What??     Did he just
reply to her??
                           SALLY
              Okay, that's weird.         Like you can
              hear me.
                           THE DOCTOR
              Well, I can hear you.
She startles, stares at the telly. Freaked now, she has
grabbed the remote, zapped the player.               The picture
freezes.
                           SALLY
                   (Shaking, angry)
              Okay, that's enough, I've had
              enough now, I've had a long day
              and I've had bloody enough!
Larry is standing at the curtain, staring at her, worried.
Sally freezes, seeing him.
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              Sorry.    Bad day.

                           LARRY
              Got you the list.
                           SALLY
              What??
                           LARRY
              The list of the seventeen DVDs.
              Thought you might be interest --
                           SALLY
                   (Snatching the list)
              Yeah, great, thanks!
Shoves past him, heading out into the shop.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. BANTO'S DVD STORE - DAY
                           BANTO
              Go to the police, you stupid
              woman!!
SALLY spins at this.         What??
But BANTO is talking at the television, still watching his
action movie.
                           BANTO (CONT'D)
              Why does nobody ever just go to
              the police.
On Sally's face - like this is a new idea!!
                                                                 CUT TO:

EXT. POLICE STATION - DAY
A fine old, age-blackened, gargoyled building.
-- panning down the building to the doors.                 Big comforting
double doors, light streaming out, big globes with POLICE
on them.
         brickwork.It's raining now, rain streaming down the
                   (V.O.)SALLY
              Look, I know how mad I’m sounding
              ...


INT. POLICE STATION. FRONT DESK - DAY
Hissing rain outside, bottle green gloom.                SALLY sits
opposite an elderly DESK SERGEANT who's being very patient
with this distressed girl.
                           DESK SERGEANT
              Shall we try it from the
              beginning this time?         Still not
              quite sure if this girl is
              missing or not.
                           SALLY
              Okay.    There's this house.         A big
              old place, been empty for years,
              falling apart.       Wester Drumlins
              you’ve beyond the estate, you've
              probably seen it --
She is interrupted by the scrape of a chair.                 She looks up.
                           DESK SERGEANT
                   (Dead serious now)
              Wester Drumlins?
                           SALLY
              Yes.
                           DESK SERGEANT
                   (Heading for the door)
              Could you just wait here for a
              minute.
The door closes behind him.
Sally: what?       What's going on now?         She glances out the
window --
-- freezes on what she sees.
Sally's POV.       Through the window, quite close, the building
on the opposite side of the street - like this one, old,
blackened.      And on the ledge directly opposite, standing
either side of a grand window, as if they belong there, TWO
WEEPING ANGELS, their faces plunged in their hands.                    They
somehow fit in - on a glance you would think they belonged
there.
She crosses to the window, stares in disbelief.                  It can't
be!    It can't be them!
But it is.      No question.       She stares --
-- and as she stares, we do a big, weird, swooping zoom in
on her eyes, till her eyes are filling the screen --
-- and in eerie slow motion, her eyes blink --


- a big                                 thoom!                                   sound effect --
-- and as they re-open, she frowns.                                                                                                                                           Stares, puzzled now -
-- because the Weeping Angels are gone from the ledge.                                                                                                                                                                                 She
steps closer to the window.                                                                                             She clutches her head.What??                                                                                        What??  Was she
imagining it?
                                                                                                        SALLY (CONT'D)
                                                    Okay.                               Cracking up now...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CUT TO:

EXT. POLICE STATION - DAY
A shot of SALLY from outside the window, craning to see
where the statues have gone.                                                                                                              We pull back slightly from
her, to see what she cannot - that THE WEEPING ANGELS now
stand either side of the window she's looking out of.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CUT TO:

INT. POLICE STATION. INTERVIEW ROOM - DAY
The door opens behind her, she startles.
Coming through the door, BILLY, much younger guy, plain
clothes.                                           Good looking, early thirties, confident to the
point of cheeky, speaks in                                                                                                      info-bursts, like a machine-
gun.
                                                                                                        BILLY
                                                    Hi, D.I. Billy Shipton - Wester
                                                    Drumlins, that's mine, can't talk
                                                    to you now, got a thing I can't
                                                    be late for, but if you could --
Breaks off, taking her in.                                                                                                      Nice.                               Very nice.                                 You can see
those thoughts clicking through his head.                                                                                                                                                            Suddenly
unleashes a dazzling smile.
                                                                                                        BILLY (CONT'D)
                                                    Hello!
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                                         (A little startled)
                                                    Hello.
He pops his head out the door, calls.
                                                                                                        BILLY
                                                    Marcie, tell 'em I'm gonna be
                                                    late for the thing.

INT. GARAGE - DAY
Lights flicker on, illuminating a row of parked cars.
We are in a big garage, barely more than a big metal shed,
rain drumming on the roof.           BILLY and SALLY have just
arrived.
Sally looks along the cars.
                           SALLY
              All of them?
                           BILLY
              Over the last two years, yeah.
They start walking along the row of parked cars - eight of
them.    We track with them.
                           BILLY (CONT'D)
              They all had personal items still
              in them.     Couple still had the
              motor running.
                           SALLY
              So over the last two years the
              owners of all these vehicles have
              driven up to Wester Drumlins
              House, parked outside, and just
              disappeared.
They have reached the end of the row.               And standing in the
final bay, not a car - the TARDIS!
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              What's that?
                           BILLY
              Oh, we found that there too.
              Somebody's idea of a joke, I
              suppose.
                           SALLY
              But what is it?       What's a police
              box?
                           BILLY
              Special kind of rozzer phone box,
              they used to have them all over.
              But this isn't a real one - the
              phone's just a dummy and the
              windows are the wrong size.           We
              can't even get in it.         Ordinary
              yale lock but nothing fits.           But
              that's not the big question.
              See, you're missing the big
              question.


                           SALLY
              Okay, what's the big question?
                           BILLY
              Will you have a drink with me?
                           SALLY
              ... I'm sorry?
                           BILLY
              Drink, you, me, now?
                           SALLY
              Aren't you on duty, Detective
              Inspector Shipton?
                           BILLY
              Nope.    Knocked off before I left -
              told 'em I had a family crisis.
                           SALLY
              Why?
                           BILLY
              Because life is short and you are
              hot.    Drink?
                           SALLY
              No.
                           BILLY
              Ever?
                           SALLY
              Maybe.
                           BILLY
              Phone number?
                           SALLY
              Moving kind of fast, D.I.
              Shipton.
                           BILLY
              Billy, I'm off duty.
                           SALLY
              Aren't you just!
But Sally has pulled out a notebook, is scribbling down her
phone number.
                           BILLY
              That your phone number?
                           SALLY
                   (Handing him the page
                     torn from her notebook)                         

                                                                                                    SALLY (cont'd)
                                                                                                                  SALLY (cont'd)
                                                    Just my phone number.                                                         Not a
                                                    promise, not a guarantee, not an
                                                    IOU - just a phone number.
                                                                                                    BILLY
                                                    Storming!                                           And that's Sally ... ?
                                                                                                    SALLY
                                                    Sally Shipton.                                                                              (Colours!          Oh my God!!)
                                                    Sparrow.                                       Sally Sparrow.                        Me, I
                                                    am. Okay, going now, don't look
                                                    at me.
She is striding for the exit, head down, embarrassed for
England.
                                                                                                    BILLY
                                                    I'll phone you!
                                                                                                    SALLY
                                                    Don't look at me.
                                                                                                    BILLY
                                                    Phone you tomorrow.
                                                                                                    SALLY
                                                    Don't look at me!
                                                                                                    BILLY
                                                    Maybe phone you tonight.
                                                                                                    SALLY
                                                    Don't look at me.
And the door slams behind her.
                                                                                                    BILLY
                                                                         (Calling after her)
                                                    Definitely gonna phone you,
                                                    gorgeous girl!
                                                                                                    SALLY
                                                                         (Calling from beyond the
                                                                              door)
                                                    You definitely better!
Billy grins - he's so in --
-- and then, glancing round, he notices something --
-- ranged along the opposite wall, faces plunged in their
hands, the three of the WEEPING ANGELS ...
He frowns in confusion - those weren't there before!
Glances round the fourth ANGEL stands at the police box, on
hand place on it, staring at it, raptly - but frozen like
the others.

He approaches them.         Walks right up to one of them, peers
closely at it.
And then that same weird, swooping zoom in on his eyes --
-- his eyes start to blink in slow motion --
-- thoom!
                                                                 CUT TO:

EXT. STREET OUTSIDE GARAGE - DAY
SALLY is heading away, through the rain, still recovering
from her mortal embarrassment --
-- and then it hits her!           She jolts to a halt, scrabbles in
her pocket --
-- and pulls out the yale key on its ratty old string.                     The
key to the box!        She turns, runs.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. GARAGE - DAY
SALLY comes tumbling through the door, key in hand --
                           SALLY
              Billy --
Stops.
       already.Looks around.   No sign of Billy.        Clearly he's left
             And then she notices --
The big double doors at the other end of the garage stand
open now, flapping in the wind and rain --
-- and in the bay where the TARDIS stood, nothing.                   The box
has gone - just a pale square on the ground marking where
it stood.      And tracks showing where it was dragged to the
doors.     The blue box has been stolen and Billy has
vanished!
Corny dramatic chords!          And Sally answers her phone.
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              Hello?                                       (Relief)
              Billy, where are you?                                       (Confusion)
              Where?
                                                                 CUT TO:

EXT. BACK STREET - DAY 'B'
A tatty back street, could be anywhere.                                                                                                                                        PERHAPS a couple
of parked cars - but not modern cars, sixties cars.                                                                                                                                                                  Kids
playing the other end of the alley - in sixties clothes,
with sixties toys.                                                                                   Sixties posters on the wall.
(Whatever's achieveable).
-- and out of nowhere, BILLY SHIPTON is slammed against the
wall.                              Dazed, he slides down.                                                                                        He sits there, against the
wall, looking                                                               Where is he, how did he get here??
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR
                                                    1969.
Billy looks up.                                                                       Tries to focus on the couple - the DOCTOR
and MARTHA - strolling down the back street towards him.
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR (CONT'D)
                                                    Not bad, as it goes.                                                                                You've got
                                                    the moon landing to look forward
                                                    to!
                                                                                                        MARTHA
                                                    Oh, the moon landing is brilliant
                                                    - we went four times.                                                                                                                      (shoots the Doctor a
                                                                              look)
                                                    Back when we had transport.
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR
                                                    Working on it!
                                                                                                        BILLY
                                                                         (Trying to get up,
                                                    Where am I?                                                                                                              failing)How did I get here?
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR
                                                    Same way we did.                                                               The touch of an
                                                    angel - same one, probably, since
                                                    you ended up in the same year.
                                                    No, don’t get up.                                                                                                                      (Sits next to Billy)
                                                    Time travel without a capsule,
                                                    nasty - catch your breath, don't
                                                    go swimming for half an hour.
                                                    I don't --BILLY                                                                                                                                                              ...  I can't -- ...
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR
                                                    Fascinating race, the weeping
                                                    angels.                                       The only creatures in
                                                    the universe to kill you nicely.
                                                    No mess, no fuss - just zap you
                                                    into the past and let you live to
                                                    death.  

                           THE DOCTOR (cont'd)
                                              THE DOCTOR (cont'd)
              The rest of your life used up and
              blown away in the blink of an
              eye.
                           BILLY
              What you talking about?
                           THE DOCTOR
              Tracked you down with this.
He holds up a gadget clearly improvised from sixties
household items.        There's a valve from a television stuck
on the top.
                           THE DOCTOR
              This is my Timey-Wimey detector.
              It goes ding when there's stuff.
              Also it can boil an egg at thirty
              paces.    Whether you want it to or
              not, actually, so I've learned to
              stay away from hens.
                                   pretty when they blow.It's not
                           BILLY
              I don't understand.         Where am I?
                           MARTHA
              1969.    Like he said.
                           THE DOCTOR
              Normally I’d offer you a lift
              home, but somebody nicked my
              motor.    So I need you to take a
              message to Sally Sparrow.           And
              I'm sorry, Billy, I'm very, very
              sorry.    It's going to take you a
              while.
On Billy's face, uncomprehending.
                                                                CUT TO:

INT. WELLGROVE HOSPICE - DAY
A bedroom, clearly an institutional one.                Sad and bland and
temporary.      An old, very sick man (OLD BILLY), sleeping
noisily on the bed.
Sally stands in the doorway, looking at him. Looking around
this tragic little room.
A red cord, hanging next to Old Billy, to pull for
attention.
She crosses to his bedside table.              Next to his phone is a
scrap of paper, torn from a notebook.               Her notebook, her
phone number written on it.


She opens her notebook, compares it with the scrap of
paper.     The torn-out page lying on the desk is ancient and
yellowed -the fragment of the same page in Sally's notebook
is brand new and white.          She joins them together again for
a moment - the tears match exactly, but one part so old,
one part so new.
She looks at Old Billy lying in the bed - emaciated, ruined
with age and illness.
It's almost too much.          She goes to the window, looks sadly
out at the pelting rain.
From behind her:
                           OLD BILLY
              It was raining when we met.
                           SALLY
              It's the same rain.
She turns to look at him.           Barely recognisable as the man
she met an hour ago.         Sad watery old eyes.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WELLGROVE HOSPICE - DAY
SALLY now sits next to OLD BILLY, looking at some
photographs.       This one is a wedding photograph.
                           SALLY
              She looks nice.
                           OLD BILLY
              Her name was Sally too.
                           SALLY
                   (Smiles)
              Sally Shipton.
                           OLD BILLY
                   (Smiles, remembering so
                     long ago)
              Sally Shipton.
Sally glances at the window, little unsure what she should
be saying.
                           SALLY
              Well.    The rain's stopping.
              That’s the good news.
Old Billy looks at the window - like there's something sad
about the rain only he understands.


                                                                                   OLD BILLY
                               I often thought about looking for
                               you before tonight - but
                               apparently it would've torn a
                               hole in the fabric of space and
                               time and destroyed two thirds of
                               the universe.                                                               Also I'd lost my
                               hair.
                                                                                   SALLY
                               Two thirds of the universe -
                               where'd you get that from?
                                                                                   OLD BILLY
                               There's a man in 1969.                                                                                  He sent
                               me with a message for you.
                               Thirty-eight years, it’s taken
                               me, getting back to you,
                                                                                   SALLY
                               What man?
                               The Doctor.OLD BILLY
Impacts on Sally.                                                          The name on the wall!
                                                                                   SALLY
                               And what’s the message?
                               Just this.OLD BILLY                                                                                                         Look at the list.
                                                                                   SALLY
                               What does that mean?                                                                          Is that it,
                               look at the list?
                                                                                   OLD BILLY
                               There’s more.                                                               But have to find
                               the rest for yourself.
                                                                                   SALLY
                               But what’s he talking about?
                               What list?
                                                                                   OLD BILLY
                               He said you’d have it by now.                                                                                    A
                               list of seventeen DVDs.
Sally blinks.                                          How could the Doctor possibly know about
that??             She fishes about in her pockets for the list.
                                                                                   OLD BILLY
                               I didn't stay a policeman back
                               then.                               Got into publishing.
                               Loved that, loved it.                                                                              Then video
                               publishing.                                                       Then DVDs, of course


                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    You                 put the Easter egg on?
                                                                                                        OLD BILLY
                                                    Have you noticed what the DVDs
                                                    all have in common yet.                                                                                                       I
                                                    suppose it’s hard for you, in a
                                                    way.
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    How could the Doctor have known
                                                    I’d have a list?                                                                          I only just got
                                                    this.
                                                                                                        OLD BILLY
                                                    He knew lots of things.
                                                    Impossible things about the
                                                    future, about you.                                                                                   I asked him
                                                    how but he said he couldn't tell
                                                    me.                      He said you'd understand it
                                                    one day --                                                                                                                               (Glances sadly at the
                                                                              window, the rain)
                                                    -- but that I never would.
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    Soon as I understand it, I'll
                                                    come and tell you.
                                                                                                        OLD BILLY
                                                    No, gorgeous girl, you won't.
                                                    There's only tonight.                                                                                               He told me
                                                    all those years ago we'd only
                                                    meet again this one time.                                                                                                        On the
                                                    night I died.
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                                         (Eyes filling)
                                                    Oh, Billy - oh no.
                                                                                                        OLD BILLY
                                                    It's kept me going.                                                                                       I’m an old,
                                                    sick man.                                               But I’ve had something
                                                    to look forward to.                                                                                                                               (Takes her hand)
                                                    Life is long.                                                               You are hot.
Sally almost laughs, in spite of herself.                                                                                                                                                         Old Billy is
looking at the contrast between Sally's hand and his own.
                                                                                                        OLD BILLY (CONT'D)
                                                    Oh, look at my hands.                                                                                               Old man
                                                    hands.                                   How did that happen?
                                                    I'll stay.SALLY                                                                                                                                                             I'm going to stay
                                                    with you.                                               Okay?


                           OLD BILLY
              Thank you, Sally Sparrow.
His eyes go to the window.
                           OLD BILLY (CONT'D)
              I have until the rain stops ...
We pan to the window, the lightening gloom.
                                                          DISSOLVE TO:

INT. WELLGROVE HOSPICE - NIGHT
The same shot of the window, only now evening sunlight is
streaming in.       And SALLY is standing at the window, staring
out.    So sad.
She looks from the window, to the list in her hand.                    The
list that Larry gave her.           She crumples it.
A phone ringing.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. BANTO'S DVD STORE - NIGHT
The shop is closing up.          LARRY picks up the phone.
                           LARRY
              Banto's.
                                                                 CUT TO:

EXT. STREET - NIGHT
SALLY striding along the street, mobile at her ear.
                           SALLY
              They're mine.
[We now intercut with the DVD shop as required.]
                           LARRY
              ... what?
                           SALLY
              The DVDs on the list.         The
              seventeen DVDs.       What they've got
              in common is me.        They're all the
              DVDs I own.      The easter egg is
              intended for me!
Larry absorbs this, astonished.             So much to take in, so
fast.


                           LARRY
              You've only got seventeen DVDs??
                           SALLY
              Do you have a portable DVD
              player?
                           LARRY
              Course, why?
                           SALLY
              I want you to meet me.
                           LARRY
              Where?
We whip pan from Sally to see where’s she walking to --
Wester Drumlins House!
A doorbell rings and we
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY - NIGHT
SALLY pulls open the front door, to reveal LARRY, a big bag
slung over his shoulder.
                           LARRY
              You live in Scooby Doo's house!
                           SALLY
              For God's sake, I don't live
              here...!
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CONSERVATORY ROOM - NIGHT
Few minutes later.         LARRY is crouched on the floor,
slipping the DVD into a portable machine.                He is now making
his way through the menu screens.              SALLY paces, agitated.
                           LARRY
              Okay, here he is.
THE DOCTOR on the screen settling into position.
              The Doctor!SALLY
                           LARRY
              Who's the Doctor?


                           SALLY
              He's the Doctor.
                           THE DOCTOR
              Yep.     That's me.
                           SALLY
                   (Startles)
              Okay, that's scary.
Larry hastens to explain.
                           LARRY
              No, you see, it sounds like he's
              replying there, but he always
              says that.
              Yes, I do.THE DOCTOR
                           LARRY
              And that.
                           THE DOCTOR
              Yep, and this.
                           SALLY
              He can hear us.       Oh my God, you
              really can hear us.
                           LARRY
              Of course he can't hear us.
              Look!
He's grabbed a folder, from his bag, flipped it open,
pulled some sheets of paper.
                           LARRY (CONT'D)
              Got a transcript, see, everything
              he says.     "Yep, that's me."
              "Yes, I do." "Yep, and this."
              Next it's --
Larry reads aloud.
          LARRY (CONT'D)                                THE DOCTOR
"Are you going to read out                    (Saying it live)
the whole thing??"                         Are you going to read out the
                                           whole thing??
Larry startles, looks at the Doctor.
                           LARRY
              Sorry.
                           SALLY
              Who are you?

                           THE DOCTOR
              I'm a time traveller.         Or I was.
              I'm stuck in 1969.
Larry's head is whipping between his transcript and the
screen.     Disbelief.
On screen, Martha’s head pops into view, indignant.
                           MARTHA
              We’re   stuck.    For three months!
              All of space and time, he
              promised me.      Now I’ve got a job
              in a shop - I’ve got to         support
              him!
                           THE DOCTOR
              Martha!
                           MARTHA
              Sorry.

                           SALLY
              I saw this bit before.
                           THE DOCTOR
              Quite possibly.
                           SALLY
              1969.    That's where you're
              talking from.
                           THE DOCTOR
              Fraid so.
                           SALLY
              But you're replying to me.           You
              can't know exactly what I'm going
              to say, forty years before I say
              it!!
                           THE DOCTOR
              Thirty-eight.
                           LARRY
              I'm getting this down!          I'm
              writing in your bits!!
He has grabbed a pen, starts scribbling frantically in the
gaps between the Doctor's remarks.
                           SALLY
              How?    How is this possible?         Tell
              me!
                           LARRY
              Not so fast.

                                                THE DOCTOR
People don't understand time -
it's not what you think it is.
                                                SALLY
Then what is it?
                                                THE DOCTOR
Complicated.
                                                SALLY
Tell me.
                                                THE DOCTOR
Very complicated.
                                                SALLY
I'm clever and I'm listening.
And don't patronise me because
people have died, and I'm not
happy.
                                                THE DOCTOR
People assume that time is a
strict progression of cause to
effect, but actually from a non-
linear, non-subjective viewpoint,
it's more like a big ball of
wibbly-wobbley, timey-wimey
stuff.
                                                SALLY
Yeah, I've seen this part.                                  You
said that sentence got away from
you.
                                                THE DOCTOR
It got away from me, yeah.
                                                SALLY
Next thing you say is "Well, I
can                 hear you".
Well, I                              canTHE DOCTOR                                       hear you.
                                                SALLY
This isn't possible!
                                                LARRY
                     (Still writing                                frantically)
It's brilliant!
                                                THE DOCTOR
Well not hear you exactly,                                  But I
know everything you're going to
say.


                                                                                       LARRY
                                                    Always gives me shivers, that
                                                    bit.
                                                                                       SALLY
                                                    How can you know what I'm going
                                                    to say?
                                                                                       THE DOCTOR
                                                    Look to your left.
She looks to her left.                                                                                   She's looking at Larry, scribbling
away.
                                                                                       LARRY
                                                    What does he mean by "look to
                                                    your left."                                      I've written tons
                                                    about that on the forums, I think
                                                    it's a political statement.
                                                                                       SALLY
                                                    He means you.
She crosses to him, looks at what he's scribbling away.
                                                                                       SALLY (CONT'D)
                                                    What are you doing?
                                                                                       LARRY
                                                    Writing in your bits.                                                                               So I've
                                                    got a complete transcript of the
                                                    whole conversation.                                                                       Wait till
                                                    this hits the net.                                                                   This will
                                                    explode the egg forums.
                                                                                       THE DOCTOR
                                                    I've got a copy of the finished
                                                    transcript.                                      It's on my autocue.
                                                                                       SALLY
                                                    How can you have the finished
                                                    transcript??                                          It's still being
                                                    written.
                                                    I told you.THE DOCTOR                                                                                                            I'm a time
                                                    traveller.                                  I got it in the
                                                    future.
                                                                                       SALLY
                                                    You are reading aloud from a
                                                    transcript of a conversation
                                                    you're still having??
                                                                                       THE DOCTOR
                                                    Wibbley-wobbley, timey-wimey.                                                                                It
                                                    doesn't matter, really - what
                                                    matters is we can communicate.                                                                                  

                           THE DOCTOR (cont'd)
                                              THE DOCTOR (cont'd)
              We've got bigger problems now.
              They've taken the blue box,
              haven't they?       The angels have
              the phone box.
                           LARRY
              "The angels have the phone box!"
              That's my favourite, I've got
              that on a tee-shirt!
                           SALLY
              What do you mean, angels?           You
              mean those statue things.
Her eyes go to THE WEEPING ANGEL in the garden, face in its
hands.

OMITTED:62
                           THE DOCTOR
              Creatures from another world.
                           SALLY
              But they're just statues.
                           THE DOCTOR
              Only when you see them.
                           SALLY
              What does that mean?
                           THE DOCTOR
              The lonely assassins, they used
              be called - no one quite knows
              where they came from but they're
              as old as the universe, or very
              nearly.     And they've survived
              this long because they have the
              most perfect defence system ever
              evolved.     They're quantum locked -
              they don't exist when they're
              being observed.       The moment they
              are seen by any other living
              creature they freeze into rock -
              no choice, a fact of their
              biology.     In the sight of any
              living thing, they literally turn
              to stone.     And you can't kill a
              stone.    Of course, a stone can't
              kill you either.        But then you
              turn your head away, then you
              blink - and oh yes it can!
                           SALLY
                   (Quietly, to Larry)
              Don't take your eyes off that!


SALLY is pointing a shaking hand at the lone statue in the
garden.
On LARRY'S face: getting it.
                           THE DOCTOR
              That's why they cover their eyes.
              They're not weeping, they can't
              risk looking at each other.
              Their greatest asset is their
              greatest curse - they can never
              be seen.     The loneliest creatures
              in the universe.
Throughout this speech, mounting fear on Sally's face.          She
glances towards the open door - are there shadows moving in
the hall, is that a floor creaking?
                           SALLY
              What are they doing here?
                           THE DOCTOR
              What they always do - hiding from
              sight, so they can live.
                           SALLY
              But there must be places where
              there's nobody about, lots of
              places.
                           THE DOCTOR
              They've come to like their
              luxuries - a nice developed
              world, a few creature comforts,
              they're anyone's for central
              heating - they just don't like to
              share.    And I'm sorry, I'm very,
              very sorry - it's up to you now.
                           SALLY
              What am I supposed to do?
                           THE DOCTOR
              The blue box, it’s my time
              machine - there's a world in
              there they could have to
              themselves forever but the damage
              they could do could switch off
              the sun.     You've got to send it
              back to me.
                           SALLY
              How?
Silence from the Doctor.
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              How??

                           THE DOCTOR
              And that's it, I'm afraid.
              There’s no more from you on the
              transcript, that’s the last I’ve
              got.    I don’t know what stopped
              you talking, but I can guess.
              They're coming.       The angels are
              coming for you.       So listen -
              they’ll be in attack mode now.
              No more killing you nicely no
              more zapping you into the past -
              they’ll just eat you.         Your life
              depends on this:        don't blink!
              Don’t even blink.        Blink and
              you’re dead.      They're fast,
              faster than you can believe.
              Don't turn your back, don't look
              away, and don't blink.          Good
              luck!
And the picture winks out.
                           SALLY
              No, don't, you can't!
And they both lunge instinctively at the tiny screen.
Larry is banging the controls, trying to bring back the
picture.
                           LARRY
              I'll rewind him!
                           SALLY
              What good would that do??
They stare at each other in a moment of mutual, dawning
horror.
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              You're not looking at the statue.
                           LARRY
              Neither are you.
They turn, fearfully --
-- and the french windows are opened, and THE WEEPING ANGEL
is right in the room with them, its arms spread, its hands
clawed, now bestial, feral.            Half its face is now obscenely
wide mouth, grinning terrible fangs.               It is frozen of
course, but it's a terrible image.
They stumble back from it, horrified.               Larry throws up his
arms to cover his face --
                           SALLY
              Keep looking at it, keep looking
              at it!!


And they do, breathing hard, trying to keep it together.
The statue stays frozen.
                                                                                                        LARRY
                                                                         (Practically gibbering
                                                                              with fear)
                                                    There's just one, right, there's
                                                    just this one, we're okay if we
                                                    just keep staring at this one
                                                    statue, everything's going to be
                                                    fine.
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    There's three more.
                                                                                                        LARRY
                                                    Three??
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    They were upstairs before but I
                                                    think I heard them moving.
                                                    Moving where??                                                LARRYThree of them,
                                                    moving where??
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    I'm going to look round, I'm
                                                    going to check, you keep looking
                                                    at this one, don't blink.
                                                    Remember what he said - don't
                                                    even blink!
                                                    Who blinks?LARRY                                                                                    I'm too scared to
                                                    blink.
Sally turns.                                                           Nothing there.
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    Okay.                               We're going to the door.
                                                    The front door.
They start edging to the door to the hall, Larry looking
back, Sally looking forward ...
                                                                                                                                       CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY - NIGHT
... in the doorway.


                           SALLY
              Okay.    We can't both get to the
              front door, without taking our
              eyes off that thing.         So you stay
              here.
                           LARRY
              What??
                           SALLY
              I'll be just round the corner,
              you stay here.
SALLY dashes to the front door, LARRY stays staring at the
frozen statue, sweating, terrified.
Sally, at the door.         Can't budge it, won't open.
                           SALLY (CONT'D)
              They've locked it.        They've
              locked us in!
                           LARRY
              Why?
                           SALLY
              I've got something they want.
                           LARRY
              What?
                           SALLY
              A key.    I took it the last time I
              was here - they followed me to
              get it back, I led them to the
              blue box!     Now they've got that!
                           LARRY
              Give them the key.
                           SALLY
              I'm gonna check the back door.
              Wait here.
She dashes off, heading to the passageway leading to the
back of the house.
                           LARRY
                   (screaming after her)
              Give them the key, give them what
              they want!!
On Larry's face, hearing Sally racing away.
                           LARRY (CONT'D)
              Sally, no, what if they come
              behind me??

He's almost delirious with fear, staring, fixedly, wide-
eyed at the statue, the darkened hallway stretching away
behind his back.
                           LARRY (CONT'D)
              Oh God!     Oh God!
THE WEEPING ANGEL, fanged and frozen a few feet in front of
him.
Creaks behind, shadows flitting, are they there?
On Larry's face.        Can't take it, needs to turn, needs to
look --
On the Weeping Angel's face.            Fanged, terrifying, frozen.
And Larry can't take a second longer.               He sneaks the
fastest possible look over his shoulder, looks right back
into the room --
-- and in that tiny fraction of a second, the Weeping Angel
is now two feet from him, its clawed hands reaching for
him, its huge mouth stretched even wider.
                           LARRY (CONT'D)
              Sally!!     Sally!!
Larry staring, terrified --
-- close on his eyes, liquid and quivering, and it's like
he's trying to stretch them right open, all the way.                    Don't
blink!     Don't blink!
Zooming close on his temple, sweat forming, droplets
trickling, curving round to his eye...
Don't blink, don't blink!
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. BACK CORRIDOR - NIGHT
SALLY has raced to the back door --
-- and there it is, boarded up.             She slams her fists
against it, despairing.
                           LARRY
                   (Screaming from off)
              Sally!!
Sally turns, to head back to Larry, and freezes at what she
sees.    A door in the back passage standing open, light
streaming out.


She goes to the door, looks through --
                                                             CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY              - NIGHT
LARRY is backing away from the frozen WEEPING ANGEL, but
he's terrified at what he might be backing into.               He's
reaching behind him with his hands, groping at the air ...
                           LARRY
              Sally, hurry up!!
                                                             CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CELLAR - NIGHT
SALLY has found herself at the top of some cellar steps.
She's staring down into the cellar.
                           SALLY
                   (Calling)
              Larry, they’ve blocked off the
              back door, but there’s a cellar -
              there might be a way out of it, a
              delivery hatch or something.
                                                             CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. HALLWAY - NIGHT
LARRY, hearing her, does as she says - starts to back away
towards the back of the house ...
                           LARRY
              I’m coming, I can’t stay here!
                                                             CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CELLAR - NIGHT
SALLY is nervously making her way down the steps, turns the
corner.
The TARDIS --
-- and standing some distance from it, three of THE WEEPING
ANGELS, their faces in their hands.
                           SALLY
              Okay, boys, I know how this
              works.    You can't move so long as
              I can see you.


She is pulling the key from her pocket.
                                                                                                  SALLY (CONT'D)
                                                    Whole world in the box, the
                                                    Doctor says.                                                  Hope he's not
                                                    lying, cos I don't see how else
                                                    we're getting out.
She looks round the motionless statues.
On Sally's eyes, close - wide, quivering, liquid.                                                                                You can
feel the not-blinking.
                                                                                                  LARRY
                                                    Sally?
LARRY has stumbled backwards into view at the cellar door.
                                                    Down here.SALLY
He turns to see Sally facing off three frozen angels.
                                                    Oh my God!!LARRY                                                                                      What are you doing??
                                                                                                  SALLY
                                                    We're getting in the blue box.
                                                    I've decided to trust the Doctor.
                                                    Get down here!
Larry comes scuttling down the steps to join Sally.                                                                                       They
are inches from the door of the TARDIS.
                                                                                                  SALLY (CONT'D)
                                                                         (Glancing to the top of
                                                                              steps)
                                                    Oh, and here's your one.
The fourth of the Weeping Angels is now in the doorway.                                                                                               It
stands, pointing solemnly at the single light bulb hanging
from the ceiling.
                                                                                                  LARRY
                                                    Why's it pointing at the --
And the light bulb hanging in the centre of the cellar
flickers!!
                                                                                                  LARRY (CONT'D)
                                                    -- light.
                                                    Oh, my God!SALLYIt's turning out
                                                    the lights!
Frantic, Sally fumbles the key at the TARDIS lock, or tries
to.


The light flickers, dims to half, strobes --
                           LARRY
              Quickly!
                           SALLY
                   (Fumbling frantically in
                     the fading light)
              I can't find the lock!!
The light is strobing frantically now - tiny blips of
darkness, longer blips of light.
The angels are approaching the TARDIS - a weird, jerky,
stop-motion advance - each flash of darkness inches them
closer --
They're feral, their mouths wide and terrifying --
                           LARRY
              Get it open!!
                           SALLY
              I can't find the lock!!
And the lights go out.          Total darkness for a terrifying
microsecond --
-- and in a glorious moment the lights of the TARDIS
windows glow on, throwing beams out into the darkness of
the cellar.
The angels are caught in the beams, their outstretched
claws inches from Sally and Larry.
Sally has found the lock, turning the key has triggered the
TARDIS lights --
-- and now the darkness is split, as the blue doors open
and the golden light of the control room spills out.
Sally and Larry stumble back into the TARDIS.                  The doors
snap shut on them.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. TARDIS
SALLY and LARRY stumble into the TARDIS, looking around in
astonishment and wonder.
              A whole world.                                                  SALLYHe wasn't lying.
A chime from the console --


-- and a hologram version of THE DOCTOR flickers into life,
standing at the console (just like with Chris in The
Parting Of The Ways.)          The image stabilises.         This one
seems like a standard announcement, rather than a specific
message.
                           THE HOLOGRAM DOCTOR
              This is security protocol 712.
              This time capsule has detected
              the presence of an authorised
              control disc, valid one journey.
              Please insert the disc and
              prepare for departure.
Larry gasps in pain.         Pulls one of the DVDs from his
jacket, flips open the case - it's glowing fiercely.
                           THE HOLOGRAM DOCTOR (CONT'D)
              On leaving the time capsule
              please do nothing that may avert
              the creation of your own species.
              Thank you.
The hologram flickers out.           One of the sections of the
console is glowing.         They dash to it.        What looks like a
DVD is lashed up to the console (like it's always been
there, not a new addition.)
                           SALLY
              Looks like a DVD player.          There's
              a slot -
The TARDIS, rocks, shakes.
                           LARRY
              They're trying to get in!
                           SALLY
              Well hurry up then!
The DVD slides into the slot.            The TARDIS engines heave and
groan into life.        Sally and Larry grab hold of the console.
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CELLAR - NIGHT
THE WEEPING ANGELS surround the TARDIS, each standing at
one face, gripping hold of it, like they're trying to tear
it apart, trying to pull off each of the four walls --
                                                                 CUT TO:

INT. TARDIS
-- SALLY and LARRY, gripping the console as the TARDIS
shudders and grinds into life --
-- and then, on their faces, pure horror!
The console is fading from under their hands!!
                                                                                                       LARRY
                                                    What's happening?
Sally looks round, wildly.                                                                                               The whole console room is
simply dissolving around them --
                                                    Oh my God!SALLY                                                                                                                                                         It's leaving us
                                                    behind!                                      Doctor, no, you can't!
-- the walls are fading, the cellar walls growing clearer.
-- and worse, THE WEEPING ANGELS, in their four-way embrace
are materialising round them!!
                                                                                                       SALLY (CONT'D)
                                                    Doctor!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                   CUT TO:

INT. WESTER DRUMLINS HOUSE. CELLAR - NIGHT
The police box fades --
-- leaving LARRY and SALLY crouched on the floor, clinging
on to each other --
-- surrounded by THE WEEPING ANGELS who - now that the
TARDIS is gone - are left staring at each other!                                                                                                                                                           Frozen.
We cut round their stone faces - all frozen in almost
comical looks of dismay.
                                                    Look at them.                                                                                                             SALLYQuick, look at
                                                    them!
                                                                                                       LARRY
                                                                         (Calmer, straightening
                                                                              up)
                                                    I don't think we need to.
They look at the frozen statues.                                                                                                                    Then squeeze out between
their locked and frozen forms.
                                                                                                       LARRY (CONT'D)
                                                    They're looking at each other.


On the statues, locked together, eternally frozen in each
other's gaze.

                                                                                                                           ON THIS WE
                                                                                                                DISSOLVE TO:

CAPTION: THREE YEARS LATER.

INT. BOOK AND DVD SHOP - DAY
Banto’s, three years on, change of ownership.                                                                                      It sells
what seem to be antiquarian books and also DVDs.                                                                                             A
CUSTOMER is just leaving Behind the counter, LARRY - five
years older, much the same - is calling through the back
curtain.
                                                                                                       LARRY
                                                    Can you mind the store - just
                                                    nipping next door for some milk.
SALLY appears through the curtain.
                                                                                                       SALLY
                                                    Yeah, no worries.
Larry is about to go when he notices the folder Sally is
clutching.
                                                                                                       LARRY
                                                    What's that?
                                                                                                       SALLY
                                                    Nothing.
She's guiltily trying to hide the folder - Larry tweaks it
from her hands.
Inside - photographs of the Doctor's wall writing, the
transcript of the DVD conversation, pages notes, more
photographs of the house and weeping angels.
                                                    Oh, Sally!LARRY                                                                                     Can't you let it go?
                                                    Five years, all you think about -
                                                    the Doctor!
                                                                                                       SALLY
                                                    Of course I can't let it go!
                                                                                                       LARRY
                                                    I check those statues twice a
                                                    week.                              They’re frozen, they’re
                                                    stuck - they’re never gonna move
                                                    again.                                  This is over.


                           SALLY
              How did the Doctor know where to
              write those words on the wall??
              How could he get a copy of the
              transcript??      Where did he get
              all that information from!
                           LARRY
              Some things you never find out.
              And it's okay.
                           SALLY
              No, it isn’t,
                           LARRY
              Ever think this could be getting
              in the way of... other things?
And he means him, and she knows it, but -
                           SALLY
              What other things?
                           LARRY
              Just... things.
                           SALLY
              We just run a shop together.
              That's all it is, just a shop.
                           LARRY
                   (hurt to the core, rides
                     it out)
              Yeah, I know.       I know.     Anyway.
              Milk.    Back in a mo.
Sally watches him cross the road - a little fond, a little
resentful --
-- and then she stares!
Because crossing the road towards her is THE DOCTOR!                The
Doctor and MARTHA, talking urgently, clearly mid-adventure.
The Doctor has an archer's bow slung around him, Martha
carries a quiver of arrows.
She stares for a moment, hardly able to believe it, hardly
able to breath --
-- then she realises they're both about to walk right past
the shop, and she hurries for the door --
                                                             CUT TO:

EXT. STREET OUTSIDE SHOP - DAY
SALLY bursts out of the door.


                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    Doctor!                                       Doctor!!
THE DOCTOR turns.
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR
                                                    Hello!                                   Sorry, bit of a rush,
                                                    there's a sort of thing
                                                    happening, and it's fairly
                                                    important that we stop it --
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                    My God, it's you, it really is
                                                    you.(Registers his blank                                                                                                                   look)
                                                    Oh!                      You don't remember me, do
                                                    you?
                                                                                                        MARTHA
                                                    Doctor, we don't have time for
                                                    this!                               The migration's started!
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR
                                                    Look, sorry - I've got a bit of a
                                                    complex life, things don't always
                                                    happen to me in quite the right
                                                    order.                                   Gets a bit confusing at
                                                    times, especially at weddings,
                                                    I'm rubbish at weddings,
                                                    especially my own                                                                           --
                                                                                                        SALLY
                                                                         (Getting it)
                                                    Oh my God!                                                   Of course, you're a
                                                    time traveller.                                                                   It hasn't
                                                    happened to you yet!                                                                                        None of it,
                                                    it's still in your future!
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR
                                                    What hasn't happened?
                                                    Doctor, please!                                                                                                          MARTHATwenty minutes
                                                    to red hatching!
Sally looks down at the folder, which she now realises is
still gripped in her hands.
                                                    It was me.SALLY                                                                                                                                           Oh for God's sake, it
                                                    was me all along.                                                                           You got it all
                                                    from me!!
                                                                                                        THE DOCTOR
                                                    Got what?
Sally hands him the folder.


              Okay.    Listen.                                                  SALLY
One day you're
              going to get stuck in 1969.           Make
              sure you've got this with you.
              You're going to need it.
                           MARTHA
              Doctor!
                           THE DOCTOR
              Listen, got to dash - things
              happening.      Well, four things.
              Well four things and a lizard.
                           SALLY
              No worries, on you go.          See you
              around, some day.
The Doctor turns to dash, hesitates, looks back.                   Cos he
recognises companion material when he sees it.
                           THE DOCTOR
              What's your name?
                           SALLY
              Sally Sparrow.
                           THE DOCTOR
              Good to meet you, Sally Sparrow.
On Sally's face - so weird to finally hear those words, to
finally meet him.        A smile of relief.         And then the tiniest
frown of sadness - mystery solved, circle closed.
-- and suddenly LARRY is beside her, clutching a carton of
milk, staring in astonishment at the Doctor.
Sally looks at Larry - and finally recognises companion
material.      Reaches out a hand, takes his.            Turns to the
Doctor.
                           SALLY
                   (A big smile - letting
                     it all go)
              Goodbye Doctor.
She turns, and leading Larry by the hand, heads back into
the shop.      The Doctor, bemused for a moment, turns, dashes
off.
We hold on the shop, pan up to the sign.
"Sparrow & Nightingale.
Antiquarian Books and Rare DVDs"


We keep panning up the building.             A ledge.      A statue on the
ledge - just an ordinary part of the building, a gargoyle,
anything like that.
Flashback: The Doctor on the DVD.              Close on the picture, we
can see the flickering lines of the television screens.
                           THE DOCTOR
                   (onscreen)
              Don’t blink!
MONTAGE: We are now cutting fast round statues - ordinary
statues, in ordinary towns.            War memorials, gravestones,
modern sculptures - this intercut with glimpses of the
Doctor on the DVD, cutting closer each time.
                           THE DOCTOR (CONT'D)
              Blink and you’re dead!
Statute!     Statue!     Statue!
                           THE DOCTOR (CONT'D)
              Don’t turn your back --
Statue!
                           THE DOCTOR (CONT'D)
              -- don’t look away --
Statue!
                           THE DOCTOR (CONT'D)
              -- and don’t blink!
Some modern sculpture in the middle of shopping centre -
crude, faceless men of rock - shopper milling innocently
around.
              Good luck!THE DOCTOR (CONT'D)
Right close on the Doctor’s eyes now --
-- as he --
-- blinks!
